What a lark!  What a plunge!  For so it had always seemed to her,
when, with a little squeak of the hinges, which she could hear now,
she had burst open the French windows and plunged at Bourton into
the open air.  How fresh, how calm, stiller than this of course,
the air was in the early morning; like the flap of a wave; the kiss
of a wave; chill and sharp and yet (for a girl of eighteen as she
then was) solemn, feeling as she did, standing there at the open
window, that something awful was about to happen; looking at the
flowers, at the trees with the smoke winding off them and the rooks
rising, falling; standing and looking until Peter Walsh said,
"Musing among the vegetables?"--was that it?--"I prefer men to
cauliflowers"--was that it?  He must have said it at breakfast one
morning when she had gone out on to the terrace--Peter Walsh.  He
would be back from India one of these days, June or July, she
forgot which, for his letters were awfully dull; it was his sayings
one remembered; his eyes, his pocket-knife, his smile, his
grumpiness and, when millions of things had utterly vanished--how
strange it was!--a few sayings like this about cabbages.

"Good-morning to you, Clarissa!" said Hugh, rather extravagantly,
for they had known each other as children.  "Where are you off to?"

"I love walking in London," said Mrs. Dalloway.  "Really it's
better than walking in the country."

"That is all," she said, looking at the fishmonger's.  "That is
all," she repeated, pausing for a moment at the window of a glove
shop where, before the War, you could buy almost perfect gloves.
And her old Uncle William used to say a lady is known by her shoes
and her gloves.  He had turned on his bed one morning in the middle
of the War.  He had said, "I have had enough."  Gloves and shoes;
she had a passion for gloves; but her own daughter, her Elizabeth,
cared not a straw for either of them.

"Dear, those motor cars," said Miss Pym, going to the window to
look, and coming back and smiling apologetically with her hands
full of sweet peas, as if those motor cars, those tyres of motor
cars, were all HER fault.

Edgar J. Watkiss, with his roll of lead piping round his arm, said
audibly, humorously of course:  "The Proime Minister's kyar."

"Let us go on, Septimus," said his wife, a little woman, with large
eyes in a sallow pointed face; an Italian girl.

"Come on," said Lucrezia.

But her husband, for they had been married four, five years now,
jumped, started, and said, "All right!" angrily, as if she had
interrupted him.

People must notice; people must see.  People, she thought, looking
at the crowd staring at the motor car; the English people, with
their children and their horses and their clothes, which she
admired in a way; but they were "people" now, because Septimus had
said, "I will kill myself"; an awful thing to say.  Suppose they
had heard him?  She looked at the crowd.  Help, help! she wanted to
cry out to butchers' boys and women.  Help!  Only last autumn she
and Septimus had stood on the Embankment wrapped in the same cloak
and, Septimus reading a paper instead of talking, she had snatched
it from him and laughed in the old man's face who saw them!  But
failure one conceals.  She must take him away into some park.

"Now we will cross," she said.

"Glaxo," said Mrs. Coates in a strained, awe-stricken voice, gazing
straight up, and her baby, lying stiff and white in her arms, gazed
straight up.

"Kreemo," murmured Mrs. Bletchley, like a sleep-walker.  With his
hat held out perfectly still in his hand, Mr. Bowley gazed straight
up.  All down the Mall people were standing and looking up into the
sky.  

"That's an E," said Mrs. Bletchley--or a dancer--

"It's toffee," murmured Mr. Bowley--(and the car went in at the
gates and nobody looked at it), and shutting off the smoke, away
and away it rushed, and the smoke faded and assembled itself round
the broad white shapes of the clouds.