What a lark!  What a plunge!  For so it had always seemed to her,
when, with a little squeak of the hinges, which she could hear now,
she had burst open the French windows and plunged at Bourton into
the open air.  How fresh, how calm, stiller than this of course,
the air was in the early morning; like the flap of a wave; the kiss
of a wave; chill and sharp and yet (for a girl of eighteen as she
then was) solemn, feeling as she did, standing there at the open
window, that something awful was about to happen; looking at the
flowers, at the trees with the smoke winding off them and the rooks
rising, falling; standing and looking until Peter Walsh said,
"Musing among the vegetables?"--was that it?--"I prefer men to
cauliflowers"--was that it?  He must have said it at breakfast one
morning when she had gone out on to the terrace--Peter Walsh.  He
would be back from India one of these days, June or July, she
forgot which, for his letters were awfully dull; it was his sayings
one remembered; his eyes, his pocket-knife, his smile, his
grumpiness and, when millions of things had utterly vanished--how
strange it was!--a few sayings like this about cabbages.

"Good-morning to you, Clarissa!" said Hugh, rather extravagantly,
for they had known each other as children.  "Where are you off to?"

"I love walking in London," said Mrs. Dalloway.  "Really it's
better than walking in the country."

"That is all," she said, looking at the fishmonger's.  "That is
all," she repeated, pausing for a moment at the window of a glove
shop where, before the War, you could buy almost perfect gloves.
And her old Uncle William used to say a lady is known by her shoes
and her gloves.  He had turned on his bed one morning in the middle
of the War.  He had said, "I have had enough."  Gloves and shoes;
she had a passion for gloves; but her own daughter, her Elizabeth,
cared not a straw for either of them.

"Dear, those motor cars," said Miss Pym, going to the window to
look, and coming back and smiling apologetically with her hands
full of sweet peas, as if those motor cars, those tyres of motor
cars, were all HER fault.

Edgar J. Watkiss, with his roll of lead piping round his arm, said
audibly, humorously of course:  "The Proime Minister's kyar."

"Let us go on, Septimus," said his wife, a little woman, with large
eyes in a sallow pointed face; an Italian girl.

"Come on," said Lucrezia.

But her husband, for they had been married four, five years now,
jumped, started, and said, "All right!" angrily, as if she had
interrupted him.

People must notice; people must see.  People, she thought, looking
at the crowd staring at the motor car; the English people, with
their children and their horses and their clothes, which she
admired in a way; but they were "people" now, because Septimus had
said, "I will kill myself"; an awful thing to say.  Suppose they
had heard him?  She looked at the crowd.  Help, help! she wanted to
cry out to butchers' boys and women.  Help!  Only last autumn she
and Septimus had stood on the Embankment wrapped in the same cloak
and, Septimus reading a paper instead of talking, she had snatched
it from him and laughed in the old man's face who saw them!  But
failure one conceals.  She must take him away into some park.

"Now we will cross," she said.

"Glaxo," said Mrs. Coates in a strained, awe-stricken voice, gazing
straight up, and her baby, lying stiff and white in her arms, gazed
straight up.

"Kreemo," murmured Mrs. Bletchley, like a sleep-walker.  With his
hat held out perfectly still in his hand, Mr. Bowley gazed straight
up.  All down the Mall people were standing and looking up into the
sky.  

"That's an E," said Mrs. Bletchley--or a dancer--

"It's toffee," murmured Mr. Bowley--(and the car went in at the
gates and nobody looked at it), and shutting off the smoke, away
and away it rushed, and the smoke faded and assembled itself round
the broad white shapes of the clouds.Mrs. Dalloway said ^she would buy the flowers herself^.

They had just come up--unfortunately--to see doctors.  Other people
came to see pictures; go to the opera; take their daughters out;
the Whitbreads came "to see doctors."  Times without number
Clarissa had visited Evelyn Whitbread in a nursing home.  ^Was
Evelyn ill again?  Evelyn was a good deal out of sorts, ^said Hugh,
intimating by a kind of pout or swell of his very well-covered,
manly, extremely handsome, perfectly upholstered body (he was
almost too well dressed always, but presumably had to be, with his
little job at Court) that his wife had some internal ailment,
nothing serious, which, as an old friend, Clarissa Dalloway would
quite understand without requiring him to specify.  ^Ah yes, she did
of course; ^what a nuisance; and felt very sisterly and oddly
conscious at the same time of her hat. 


She could remember scene after scene at Bourton--Peter furious;
Hugh not, of course, his match in any way, but still not a positive
imbecile as Peter made out; not a mere barber's block.  When his
old mother wanted him to give up shooting or to take her to Bath he
did it, without a word; he was really unselfish, and as for saying,
as Peter did, ^that he had no heart, no brain, nothing but the
manners and breeding of an English gentleman,^ that was only her
dear Peter at his worst; and he could be intolerable; he could be
impossible; but adorable to walk with on a morning like this.

It was the state of the world that interested him; Wagner, Pope's poetry, people's
characters eternally, and the defects of her own soul.  How he
scolded her!  How they argued!  ^She would marry a Prime Minister
and stand at the top of a staircase; the perfect hostess^ he called
her (she had cried over it in her bedroom), ^she had the makings of
the perfect hostess,^ he said.


Never could she
understand how he cared.  But those Indian women did presumably--
silly, pretty, flimsy nincompoops.  And she wasted her pity.  ^For
he was quite happy,^ he assured her--perfectly happy, though he had
never done a thing that they talked of; his whole life had been a
failure.  It made her angry still.

She knew
nothing; no language, no history; she scarcely read a book now,
except memoirs in bed; and yet to her it was absolutely absorbing;
all this; the cabs passing; and she would not say of Peter, she
would not say of herself, ^I am this, I am that^.

She would not say of any one in the world now that ^they were this
or were that.^

But every one remembered;
what she loved was this, here, now, in front of her; the fat lady
in the cab.  ^Did it matter then,^ she asked herself, walking towards
Bond Street, ^did it matter that she must inevitably cease
completely; all this must go on without her; did she resent it; or
did it not become consoling to believe that death ended absolutely?^

^Not a straw,^ she thought, going on up Bond Street to a shop where
they kept flowers for her when she gave a party.  Elizabeth really
cared for her dog most of all.  The whole house this morning smelt
of tar.  Still, better poor Grizzle than Miss Kilman; better
distemper and tar and all the rest of it than sitting mewed in a
stuffy bedroom with a prayer book!  Better anything, she was
inclined to say.  ^But it might be only a phase, as Richard said,
such as all girls go through.  It might be falling in love.^

But
why with Miss Kilman? who had been badly treated of course; one
must make allowances for that, and Richard said ^she was very able,
had a really historical mind.^

^Nonsense, nonsense!^ she cried to herself, pushing through the swing
doors of Mulberry's the florists.  

And as she began to go with Miss Pym from jar to jar, choosing,
^nonsense, nonsense,^ she said to herself, more and more gently, as
if this beauty, this scent, this colour, and Miss Pym liking her,
trusting her, were a wave which she let flow over her and surmount
that hatred, that monster, surmount it all; and it lifted her up
and up when--oh! a pistol shot in the street outside!

People must notice; people must see.  People, she thought, looking
at the crowd staring at the motor car; the English people, with
their children and their horses and their clothes, which she
admired in a way; but they were "people" now, because Septimus had
said, "I will kill myself"; an awful thing to say.  Suppose they
had heard him?  She looked at the crowd.  ^Help, help!^ she wanted to
cry out to butchers' boys and women.  ^Help! ^ Only last autumn she
and Septimus had stood on the Embankment wrapped in the same cloak
and, Septimus reading a paper instead of talking, she had snatched
it from him and laughed in the old man's face who saw them!  But
failure one conceals.  She must take him away into some park.

"Look, look, Septimus!" she cried.  For Dr. Holmes had told her to
^make her husband^ (who had nothing whatever seriously the matter
with him but was a little out of sorts) ^take an interest in things
outside himself.^
