What a lark!  What a plunge!  For so it had always seemed to her,
when, with a little squeak of the hinges, which she could hear now,
she had burst open the French windows and plunged at Bourton into
the open air.  How fresh, how calm, stiller than this of course,
the air was in the early morning; like the flap of a wave; the kiss
of a wave; chill and sharp and yet (for a girl of eighteen as she
then was) solemn, feeling as she did, standing there at the open
window, that something awful was about to happen; looking at the
flowers, at the trees with the smoke winding off them and the rooks
rising, falling; standing and looking until Peter Walsh said,
"Musing among the vegetables?"--was that it?--"I prefer men to
cauliflowers"--was that it?  He must have said it at breakfast one
morning when she had gone out on to the terrace--Peter Walsh.  He
would be back from India one of these days, June or July, she
forgot which, for his letters were awfully dull; it was his sayings
one remembered; his eyes, his pocket-knife, his smile, his
grumpiness and, when millions of things had utterly vanished--how
strange it was!--a few sayings like this about cabbages.

"Good-morning to you, Clarissa!" said Hugh, rather extravagantly,
for they had known each other as children.  "Where are you off to?"

"I love walking in London," said Mrs. Dalloway.  "Really it's
better than walking in the country."

"That is all," she said, looking at the fishmonger's.  "That is
all," she repeated, pausing for a moment at the window of a glove
shop where, before the War, you could buy almost perfect gloves.
And her old Uncle William used to say a lady is known by her shoes
and her gloves.  He had turned on his bed one morning in the middle
of the War.  He had said, "I have had enough."  Gloves and shoes;
she had a passion for gloves; but her own daughter, her Elizabeth,
cared not a straw for either of them.

"Dear, those motor cars," said Miss Pym, going to the window to
look, and coming back and smiling apologetically with her hands
full of sweet peas, as if those motor cars, those tyres of motor
cars, were all HER fault.

Edgar J. Watkiss, with his roll of lead piping round his arm, said
audibly, humorously of course:  "The Proime Minister's kyar."

"Let us go on, Septimus," said his wife, a little woman, with large
eyes in a sallow pointed face; an Italian girl.

"Come on," said Lucrezia.

But her husband, for they had been married four, five years now,
jumped, started, and said, "All right!" angrily, as if she had
interrupted him.

People must notice; people must see.  People, she thought, looking
at the crowd staring at the motor car; the English people, with
their children and their horses and their clothes, which she
admired in a way; but they were "people" now, because Septimus had
said, "I will kill myself"; an awful thing to say.  Suppose they
had heard him?  She looked at the crowd.  Help, help! she wanted to
cry out to butchers' boys and women.  Help!  Only last autumn she
and Septimus had stood on the Embankment wrapped in the same cloak
and, Septimus reading a paper instead of talking, she had snatched
it from him and laughed in the old man's face who saw them!  But
failure one conceals.  She must take him away into some park.

"Now we will cross," she said.

"Glaxo," said Mrs. Coates in a strained, awe-stricken voice, gazing
straight up, and her baby, lying stiff and white in her arms, gazed
straight up.

"Kreemo," murmured Mrs. Bletchley, like a sleep-walker.  With his
hat held out perfectly still in his hand, Mr. Bowley gazed straight
up.  All down the Mall people were standing and looking up into the
sky.  

"That's an E," said Mrs. Bletchley--or a dancer--

"It's toffee," murmured Mr. Bowley--(and the car went in at the
gates and nobody looked at it), and shutting off the smoke, away
and away it rushed, and the smoke faded and assembled itself round
the broad white shapes of the clouds.Mrs. Dalloway said ^she would buy the flowers herself^.

They had just come up--unfortunately--to see doctors.  Other people
came to see pictures; go to the opera; take their daughters out;
the Whitbreads came "to see doctors."  Times without number
Clarissa had visited Evelyn Whitbread in a nursing home.  ^Was
Evelyn ill again?  Evelyn was a good deal out of sorts, ^said Hugh,
intimating by a kind of pout or swell of his very well-covered,
manly, extremely handsome, perfectly upholstered body (he was
almost too well dressed always, but presumably had to be, with his
little job at Court) that his wife had some internal ailment,
nothing serious, which, as an old friend, Clarissa Dalloway would
quite understand without requiring him to specify.  ^Ah yes, she did
of course; ^what a nuisance; and felt very sisterly and oddly
conscious at the same time of her hat. 


She could remember scene after scene at Bourton--Peter furious;
Hugh not, of course, his match in any way, but still not a positive
imbecile as Peter made out; not a mere barber's block.  When his
old mother wanted him to give up shooting or to take her to Bath he
did it, without a word; he was really unselfish, and as for saying,
as Peter did, ^that he had no heart, no brain, nothing but the
manners and breeding of an English gentleman,^ that was only her
dear Peter at his worst; and he could be intolerable; he could be
impossible; but adorable to walk with on a morning like this.

It was the state of the world that interested him; Wagner, Pope's poetry, people's
characters eternally, and the defects of her own soul.  How he
scolded her!  How they argued!  ^She would marry a Prime Minister
and stand at the top of a staircase; the perfect hostess^ he called
her (she had cried over it in her bedroom), ^she had the makings of
the perfect hostess,^ he said.


Never could she
understand how he cared.  But those Indian women did presumably--
silly, pretty, flimsy nincompoops.  And she wasted her pity.  ^For
he was quite happy,^ he assured her--perfectly happy, though he had
never done a thing that they talked of; his whole life had been a
failure.  It made her angry still.

She knew
nothing; no language, no history; she scarcely read a book now,
except memoirs in bed; and yet to her it was absolutely absorbing;
all this; the cabs passing; and she would not say of Peter, she
would not say of herself, ^I am this, I am that^.

She would not say of any one in the world now that ^they were this
or were that.^

But every one remembered;
what she loved was this, here, now, in front of her; the fat lady
in the cab.  ^Did it matter then,^ she asked herself, walking towards
Bond Street, ^did it matter that she must inevitably cease
completely; all this must go on without her; did she resent it; or
did it not become consoling to believe that death ended absolutely?^

^Not a straw,^ she thought, going on up Bond Street to a shop where
they kept flowers for her when she gave a party.  Elizabeth really
cared for her dog most of all.  The whole house this morning smelt
of tar.  Still, better poor Grizzle than Miss Kilman; better
distemper and tar and all the rest of it than sitting mewed in a
stuffy bedroom with a prayer book!  Better anything, she was
inclined to say.  ^But it might be only a phase, as Richard said,
such as all girls go through.  It might be falling in love.^

But
why with Miss Kilman? who had been badly treated of course; one
must make allowances for that, and Richard said ^she was very able,
had a really historical mind.^

^Nonsense, nonsense!^ she cried to herself, pushing through the swing
doors of Mulberry's the florists.  

And as she began to go with Miss Pym from jar to jar, choosing,
^nonsense, nonsense,^ she said to herself, more and more gently, as
if this beauty, this scent, this colour, and Miss Pym liking her,
trusting her, were a wave which she let flow over her and surmount
that hatred, that monster, surmount it all; and it lifted her up
and up when--oh! a pistol shot in the street outside!

People must notice; people must see.  People, she thought, looking
at the crowd staring at the motor car; the English people, with
their children and their horses and their clothes, which she
admired in a way; but they were "people" now, because Septimus had
said, "I will kill myself"; an awful thing to say.  Suppose they
had heard him?  She looked at the crowd.  ^Help, help!^ she wanted to
cry out to butchers' boys and women.  ^Help! ^ Only last autumn she
and Septimus had stood on the Embankment wrapped in the same cloak
and, Septimus reading a paper instead of talking, she had snatched
it from him and laughed in the old man's face who saw them!  But
failure one conceals.  She must take him away into some park.

"Look, look, Septimus!" she cried.  For Dr. Holmes had told her to
^make her husband^ (who had nothing whatever seriously the matter
with him but was a little out of sorts) ^take an interest in things
outside himself.^

"K . . . R . . ." said the nursemaid, and Septimus heard her say
"Kay Arr" close to his ear, deeply, softly, like a mellow organ,
but with a roughness in her voice like a grasshopper's, which
rasped his spine deliciously and sent running up into his brain
waves of sound which, concussing, broke. 

"Septimus!" said Rezia.  He started violently.  People must notice.

"I am going to walk to the fountain and back," she said.

For she could stand it no longer.  Dr. Holmes might say ^there was
nothing the matter^.  Far rather would she that he were dead!

"Septimus has been working too hard"--that was all she could say to her own
mother.  To love makes one solitary, she thought.

"For you should see the Milan gardens," she said aloud.  But to
whom?

But though they are gone, the night
is full of them; robbed of colour, blank of windows, they exist
more ponderously, give out what the frank daylight fails to
transmit--the trouble and suspense of things conglomerated there in
the darkness; huddled together in the darkness; reft of the relief
which dawn brings when, washing the walls white and grey, spotting
each window-pane, lifting the mist from the fields, showing the
red-brown cows peacefully grazing, all is once more decked out to
the eye; exists again.  ^I am alone; I am alone!^ she cried, by the
fountain in Regent's Park (staring at the Indian and his cross), as
perhaps at midnight, when all boundaries are lost, the country
reverts to its ancient shape, as the Romans saw it, lying cloudy,
when they landed, and the hills had no names and rivers wound they
knew not where--such was her darkness; when suddenly, as if a shelf
were shot forth and she stood on it, she said how ^she was his wife,
married years ago in Milan, his wife, and would never, never tell
that he was mad!^  Turning, the shelf fell; down, down she dropped.
For he was gone, she thought--gone, as he threatened, to kill
himself--to throw himself under a cart!  But no; there he was;
still sitting alone on the seat, in his shabby overcoat, his legs
crossed, staring, talking aloud.

"What are you saying?" said Rezia suddenly, sitting down by him.

"Look," she implored him, pointing at a little troop of boys
carrying cricket stumps, and one shuffled, spun round on his heel
and shuffled, as if he were acting a clown at the music hall.

"Look," she implored him, for Dr. Holmes had told her to ^make him
notice real things, go to a music hall, play cricket--that was the
very game,^ Dr. Holmes said, ^a nice out-of-door game, the very game
for her husband^.

"Look," she repeated.

^Look^ the unseen bade him, the voice which now communicated with him
who was the greatest of mankind, Septimus, lately taken from life
to death, the Lord who had come to renew society, who lay like a
coverlet, a snow blanket smitten only by the sun, for ever
unwasted, suffering for ever, the scapegoat, the eternal sufferer,
but ^he did not want it^, he moaned, putting from him with a wave of
his hand that eternal suffering, that eternal loneliness.

"Look," she repeated, for he must not talk aloud to himself out of
doors.

"Oh look," she implored him.  But what was there to look at?  A few
sheep.  That was all.

"Not this way--over there!" Rezia exclaimed, waving her aside, lest
she should see Septimus.

^Horror!  horror!^  she wanted to cry.  (She had left her people;
they had warned her what would happen.)

^Why hadn't she stayed at home?^ she cried, twisting the knob of the
iron railing.

Roses, she thought sardonically.  All trash, m'dear.  For really,
what with eating, drinking, and mating, the bad days and good, life
had been no mere matter of roses, and what was more, let me tell
you, Carrie Dempster had no wish to change her lot with any woman's
in Kentish Town!  ^But,^ she implored, ^pity.  Pity, for the loss of
roses.  Pity^ she asked of Maisie Johnson, standing by the hyacinth
beds.

"What are they looking at?" said Clarissa Dalloway to the maid who
opened her door.


"Mr. Dalloway, ma'am"--

Clarissa read on the telephone pad, "Lady Bruton wishes to know if
Mr. Dalloway will lunch with her to-day."

"Mr. Dalloway, ma'am, told me to tell you he would be lunching
out."

"Dear!" said Clarissa, and Lucy shared as she meant her to her
disappointment (but not the pang); felt the concord between them;
took the hint; thought how the gentry love; gilded her own future
with calm; and, taking Mrs. Dalloway's parasol, handled it like a
sacred weapon which a Goddess, having acquitted herself honourably
in the field of battle, sheds, and placed it in the umbrella stand.

"Fear no more," said Clarissa.  Fear no more the heat o' the sun;
for the shock of Lady Bruton asking Richard to lunch without her
made the moment in which she had stood shiver, as a plant on the
river-bed feels the shock of a passing oar and shivers: so she
rocked: so she shivered.

She sat on the floor--that was her first impression of Sally--she
sat on the floor with her arms round her knees, smoking a
cigarette.  Where could it have been?  The Mannings?  The Kinloch-
Jones's?  At some party (where, she could not be certain), for she
had a distinct recollection of saying to the man she was with, "Who
is THAT?"  And he had told her, and said that ^Sally's parents did
not get on^ (how that shocked her--that one's parents should
quarrel!).

 Sally always said ^she had French
blood in her veins, an ancestor had been with Marie Antoinette, had
his head cut off, left a ruby ring.^  Perhaps that summer she came
to stay at Bourton, walking in quite unexpectedly without a penny
in her pocket, one night after dinner, and upsetting poor Aunt
Helena to such an extent that she never forgave her.  There had
been some quarrel at home.  She literally hadn't a penny that night
when she came to them--had pawned a brooch to come down.  She had
rushed off in a passion.  They sat up till all hours of the night
talking.  Sally it was who made her feel, for the first time, how
sheltered the life at Bourton was.  She knew nothing about sex--
nothing about social problems.  She had once seen an old man who
had dropped dead in a field--she had seen cows just after their
calves were born.  But Aunt Helena never liked discussion of
anything (when Sally gave her William Morris, it had to be wrapped
in brown paper).  There they sat, hour after hour, talking in her
bedroom at the top of the house, talking about life, how they were
to reform the world.  They meant to found a society to abolish
private property, and actually had a letter written, though not
sent out.  The ideas were Sally's, of course--but very soon she was
just as excited--read Plato in bed before breakfast; read Morris;
read Shelley by the hour.

Sally went out,
picked hollyhocks, dahlias--all sorts of flowers that had never
been seen together--cut their heads off, and made them swim on the
top of water in bowls.  The effect was extraordinary--coming in to
dinner in the sunset.  (Of course Aunt Helena thought it wicked to
treat flowers like that.)  Then she forgot her sponge, and ran
along the passage naked.  That grim old housemaid, Ellen Atkins,
went about grumbling--"Suppose any of the gentlemen had seen?"
Indeed she did shock people.  ^She was untidy,^ Papa said.

he strange thing, on looking back, was the purity, the integrity,
of her feeling for Sally.  It was not like one's feeling for a man.
It was completely disinterested, and besides, it had a quality
which could only exist between women, between women just grown up.
It was protective, on her side; sprang from a sense of being in
league together, a presentiment of something that was bound to part
them (they spoke of marriage always as a catastrophe), which led to
this chivalry, this protective feeling which was much more on her
side than Sally's.  For in those days she was completely reckless;
did the most idiotic things out of bravado; bicycled round the
parapet on the terrace; smoked cigars.  Absurd, she was--very
absurd.  But the charm was overpowering, to her at least, so that
she could remember standing in her bedroom at the top of the house
holding the hot-water can in her hands and saying aloud, "She is
beneath this roof. . . .  She is beneath this roof!"


All this was only a background for Sally.  She stood by the
fireplace talking, in that beautiful voice which made everything
she said sound like a caress, to Papa, who had begun to be
attracted rather against his will (he never got over lending her
one of his books and finding it soaked on the terrace), when
suddenly she said, "What a shame to sit indoors!" and they all went
out on to the terrace and walked up and down.  Peter Walsh and
Joseph Breitkopf went on about Wagner. 

"Star-gazing?" said Peter.


"Oh this horror!" she said to herself, as if she had known all
along that something would interrupt, would embitter her moment of
happiness.


"Oh Lucy," she said, "the silver does look nice!"

"And how," she said, turning the crystal dolphin to stand straight,
"how did you enjoy the play last night?"  "Oh, they had to go
before the end!" she said.  "They had to be back at ten!" she said.
"So they don't know what happened," she said.  "That does seem hard
luck," she said (for her servants stayed later, if they asked her).
"That does seem rather a shame," she said, taking the old bald-
looking cushion in the middle of the sofa and putting it in Lucy's
arms, and giving her a little push, and crying:

"Take it away!  Give it to Mrs. Walker with my compliments!  Take
it away!" she cried.

And Lucy stopped at the drawing-room door, holding the cushion, and
said, very shyly, turning a little pink, ^Couldn't she help to mend
that dress?^

^But,^ said Mrs. Dalloway, ^she had enough on her hands already, quite
enough of her own to do without that.^

"But, thank you, Lucy, oh, thank you," said Mrs. Dalloway, and
thank you, thank you, she went on saying (sitting down on the sofa
with her dress over her knees, her scissors, her silks), thank you,
thank you, she went on saying in gratitude to her servants
generally for helping her to be like this, to be what she wanted,
gentle, generous-hearted.  Her servants liked her.  And then this
dress of hers--where was the tear? and now her needle to be
threaded.  This was a favourite dress, one of Sally Parker's, the
last almost she ever made, alas, for Sally had now retired, living
at Ealing, and if ever I have a moment, thought Clarissa (but never
would she have a moment any more), I shall go and see her at
Ealing.  For she was a character, thought Clarissa, a real artist.
She thought of little out-of-the-way things; yet her dresses were
never queer.  You could wear them at Hatfield; at Buckingham
Palace.  She had worn them at Hatfield; at Buckingham Palace.


"Heavens, the front-door bell!" exclaimed Clarissa, staying her
needle.  Roused, she listened.

"Mrs. Dalloway will see me," said the elderly man in the hall.  "Oh
yes, she will see ME," he repeated, putting Lucy aside very
benevolently, and running upstairs ever so quickly.  "Yes, yes,
yes," he muttered as he ran upstairs.  "She will see me.  After
five years in India, Clarissa will see me."

"Who can--what can," asked Mrs. Dalloway (thinking it was
outrageous to be interrupted at eleven o'clock on the morning of
the day she was giving a party), hearing a step on the stairs.  She
heard a hand upon the door.  She made to hide her dress, like a
virgin protecting chastity, respecting privacy.  Now the brass knob
slipped.  Now the door opened, and in came--for a single second she
could not remember what he was called! so surprised she was to see
him, so glad, so shy, so utterly taken aback to have Peter Walsh
come to her unexpectedly in the morning!  (She had not read his
letter.)

"And how are you?" said Peter Walsh, positively trembling; taking
both her hands; kissing both her hands.  She's grown older, he
thought, sitting down.  I shan't tell her anything about it, he
thought, for she's grown older.  She's looking at me, he thought,
a sudden embarrassment coming over him, though he had kissed her
hands.  Putting his hand into his pocket, he took out a large
pocket-knife and half opened the blade.

"How heavenly it is to see you again!" she exclaimed.  He had his
knife out.  That's so like him, she thought.

"And what's all this?" he said, tilting his pen-knife towards her
green dress.


"Richard's very well.  Richard's at a Committee," said Clarissa.

^And she opened her scissors,^ and said, ^did he mind her just
finishing what she was doing to her dress, for they had a party
that night?^


"Which I shan't ask you to," she said.  "My dear Peter!" she said.

But it was delicious to hear her say that--^my dear Peter!^  Indeed,
it was all so delicious--the silver, the chairs; all so delicious!

^Why wouldn't she ask him to her party?^ he asked.


"But it's so extraordinary that you should have come this morning!"
she cried, putting her hands, one on top of another, down on her
dress.

"Do you remember," she said, "how the blinds used to flap at
Bourton?"

"They did," he said; and he remembered breakfasting alone, very
awkwardly, with her father; who had died; and he had not written to
Clarissa.  But he had never got on well with old Parry, that
querulous, weak-kneed old man, Clarissa's father, Justin Parry.

"I often wish I'd got on better with your father," he said.

"But he never liked any one who--our friends," said Clarissa; and
could have bitten her tongue for thus reminding Peter that he had
wanted to marry her.

