At the very same moment,
rather to her amusement, the door was flung open, and a young man
entered the room. Katharine, as she shook hands with him, asked him,
in her own mind, "Now, do you think we're enjoying ourselves
enormously?"... "Mr. Denham, mother," she said aloud, for she saw that
her mother had forgotten his name.

He kept this suspended while the newcomer sat down,
and Mrs. Hilbery deftly joined the severed parts by leaning towards him
and remarking:

"Now, what would you do if you were married to an engineer, and had to
live in Manchester, Mr. Denham?"

"Surely she could learn Persian," broke in a thin, elderly gentleman.
"Is there no retired schoolmaster or man of letters in Manchester with
whom she could read Persian?"

"Have you ever been to Manchester?" he asked Katharine.

"Never," she replied.

"Why do you object to it, then?"

"I should think there would be no one to talk to in Manchester," she
replied at random. Mr. Fortescue had been observing her for a moment or
two, as novelists are inclined to observe, and at this remark he smiled,
and made it the text for a little further speculation.

"In spite of a slight tendency to exaggeration, Katharine decidedly
hits the mark," he said, and lying back in his chair, with his opaque
contemplative eyes fixed on the ceiling, and the tips of his fingers
pressed together, he depicted, first the horrors of the streets of
Manchester, and then the bare, immense moors on the outskirts of the
town, and then the scrubby little house in which the girl would live,
and then the professors and the miserable young students devoted to the
more strenuous works of our younger dramatists, who would visit her,
and how her appearance would change by degrees, and how she would fly to
London, and how Katharine would have to lead her about, as one leads an
eager dog on a chain, past rows of clamorous butchers' shops, poor dear
creature.

Oh, Mr. Fortescue," exclaimed Mrs. Hilbery, as he finished, "I had just
written to say how I envied her! I was thinking of the big gardens and
the dear old ladies in mittens, who read nothing but the "Spectator,"
and snuff the candles. Have they ALL disappeared? I told her she would
find the nice things of London without the horrid streets that depress
one so."

"There is the University," said the thin gentleman, who had previously
insisted upon the existence of people knowing Persian.

"I know there are moors there, because I read about them in a book the
other day," said Katharine.

"I am grieved and amazed at the ignorance of my family," Mr. Hilbery
remarked. He was an elderly man, with a pair of oval, hazel eyes which
were rather bright for his time of life, and relieved the heaviness of
his face. 

"Would it be the Battle of Trafalgar or the Spanish Armada, Katharine?"
her mother demanded.

"Trafalgar, mother."

"Trafalgar, of course! How stupid of me! Another cup of tea, with a thin
slice of lemon in it, and then, dear Mr. Fortescue, please explain my
absurd little puzzle. One can't help believing gentlemen with Roman
noses, even if one meets them in omnibuses."

But Mrs. Hilbery was immediately sensitive to any silence
in the drawing-room, as of a dumb note in a sonorous scale, and leaning
across the table she observed, in the curiously tentative detached
manner which always gave her phrases the likeness of butterflies
flaunting from one sunny spot to another, "D'you know, Mr. Denham, you
remind me so much of dear Mr. Ruskin.... Is it his tie, Katharine, or
his hair, or the way he sits in his chair? Do tell me, Mr. Denham, are
you an admirer of Ruskin? Some one, the other day, said to me, 'Oh, no,
we don't read Ruskin, Mrs. Hilbery.' What DO you read, I wonder?--for
you can't spend all your time going up in aeroplanes and burrowing into
the bowels of the earth."

She looked benevolently at Denham, who said nothing articulate, and
then at Katharine, who smiled but said nothing either, upon which Mrs.
Hilbery seemed possessed by a brilliant idea, and exclaimed:

"I'm sure Mr. Denham would like to see our things, Katharine. I'm sure
he's not like that dreadful young man, Mr. Ponting, who told me that he
considered it our duty to live exclusively in the present. After all,
what IS the present? Half of it's the past, and the better half, too, I
should say," she added, turning to Mr. Fortescue.

Denham rose, half meaning to go, and thinking that he had seen all that
there was to see, but Katharine rose at the same moment, and saying,
"Perhaps you would like to see the pictures," led the way across the
drawing-room to a smaller room opening out of it.

Katharine waited as though for him to receive a full impression, and
then she said:

"This is his writing-table. He used this pen," and she lifted a quill
pen and laid it down again. The writing-table was splashed with old ink,
and the pen disheveled in service. There lay the gigantic gold-rimmed
spectacles, ready to his hand, and beneath the table was a pair of
large, worn slippers, one of which Katharine picked up, remarking:

"I think my grandfather must have been at least twice as large as any
one is nowadays. This," she went on, as if she knew what she had to say
by heart, "is the original manuscript of the 'Ode to Winter.' The early
poems are far less corrected than the later. Would you like to look at
it?"

"This is a copy of the first edition of the poems," she continued,
without considering the fact that Mr. Denham was still occupied with the
manuscript, "which contains several poems that have not been reprinted,
as well as corrections." She paused for a minute, and then went on, as
if these spaces had all been calculated.

"That lady in blue is my great-grandmother, by Millington. Here is my
uncle's walking-stick--he was Sir Richard Warburton, you know, and rode
with Havelock to the Relief of Lucknow. And then, let me see--oh, that's
the original Alardyce, 1697, the founder of the family fortunes, with
his wife. Some one gave us this bowl the other day because it has their
crest and initials. We think it must have been given them to celebrate
their silver wedding-day."

In his spare build
and thin, though healthy, cheeks, she saw tokens of an angular and acrid
soul. His voice, she noticed, had a slight vibrating or creaking sound
in it, as he laid down the manuscript and said:

"You must be very proud of your family, Miss Hilbery."

"Yes, I am," Katharine answered, and she added, "Do you think there's
anything wrong in that?"

"Wrong? How should it be wrong? It must be a bore, though, showing your
things to visitors," he added reflectively.

"Not if the visitors like them."

"Isn't it difficult to live up to your ancestors?" he proceeded.

"I dare say I shouldn't try to write poetry," Katharine replied.

"No. And that's what I should hate. I couldn't bear my grandfather
to cut me out. And, after all," Denham went on, glancing round him
satirically, as Katharine thought, "it's not your grandfather only.
You're cut out all the way round. I suppose you come of one of the most
distinguished families in England. There are the Warburtons and the
Mannings--and you're related to the Otways, aren't you? I read it all in
some magazine," he added.

"The Otways are my cousins," Katharine replied.

"Well," said Denham, in a final tone of voice, as if his argument were
proved.

"Well," said Katharine, "I don't see that you've proved anything."

"Well," said Denham again, suddenly opening the little book of poems,
as though he had said all that he meant to say or could, with propriety,
say. He turned over the pages with great decision, as if he were judging
the book in its entirety, the printing and paper and binding, as well
as the poetry, and then, having satisfied himself of its good or bad
quality, he placed it on the writing-table, and examined the malacca
cane with the gold knob which had belonged to the soldier.

"But aren't you proud of your family?" Katharine demanded.

"No," said Denham. "We've never done anything to be proud of--unless you
count paying one's bills a matter for pride."

"That sounds rather dull," Katharine remarked.

"You would think us horribly dull," Denham agreed.

"Yes, I might find you dull, but I don't think I should find you
ridiculous," Katharine added, as if Denham had actually brought that
charge against her family.

"No--because we're not in the least ridiculous. We're a respectable
middle-class family, living at Highgate."

"We don't live at Highgate, but we're middle class too, I suppose."

"That belonged to Clive, so we say," said Katharine, taking up her
duties as hostess again automatically.

"Is it a lie?" Denham inquired.

"It's a family tradition. I don't know that we can prove it."

"You see, we don't have traditions in our family," said Denham.

"You sound very dull," Katharine remarked, for the second time.

"Merely middle class," Denham replied.

"You pay your bills, and you speak the truth. I don't see why you should
despise us."


"I shouldn't like to be you; that's all I said," he replied, as if he
were saying what he thought as accurately as he could.

"No, but one never would like to be any one else."

"I should. I should like to be lots of other people."

"Then why not us?" Katharine asked.

So soon, so
easily, would he be forgotten.

"You'll never know anything at first hand," he began, almost savagely.
"It's all been done for you. You'll never know the pleasure of buying
things after saving up for them, or reading books for the first time, or
making discoveries."

"Go on," Katharine observed, as he paused, suddenly doubtful, when he
heard his voice proclaiming aloud these facts, whether there was any
truth in them.

"Of course, I don't know how you spend your time," he continued, a
little stiffly, "but I suppose you have to show people round. You
are writing a life of your grandfather, aren't you? And this kind of
thing"--he nodded towards the other room, where they could hear bursts
of cultivated laughter--"must take up a lot of time."

She looked at him expectantly, as if between them they were decorating
a small figure of herself, and she saw him hesitating in the disposition
of some bow or sash.

"You've got it very nearly right," she said, "but I only help my mother.
I don't write myself."

"Do you do anything yourself?" he demanded.

"What do you mean?" she asked. "I don't leave the house at ten and come
back at six."

"I don't mean that."

"Nobody ever does do anything worth doing nowadays," she remarked. "You
see"--she tapped the volume of her grandfather's poems--"we don't
even print as well as they did, and as for poets or painters or
novelists--there are none; so, at any rate, I'm not singular."

"No, we haven't any great men," Denham replied. "I'm very glad that we
haven't. I hate great men. The worship of greatness in the nineteenth
century seems to me to explain the worthlessness of that generation."


"Well," she said, "how do you like our things, Mr. Denham?"

Mrs. Hilbery handled the book he had laid down.

"There are some books that LIVE," she mused. "They are young with us,
and they grow old with us. Are you fond of poetry, Mr. Denham? But what
an absurd question to ask! The truth is, dear Mr. Fortescue has almost
tired me out. He is so eloquent and so witty, so searching and so
profound that, after half an hour or so, I feel inclined to turn out all
the lights. But perhaps he'd be more wonderful than ever in the dark.
What d'you think, Katharine? Shall we give a little party in complete
darkness? There'd have to be bright rooms for the bores...."

Here Mr. Denham held out his hand.

"But we've any number of things to show you!" Mrs. Hilbery exclaimed,
taking no notice of it. "Books, pictures, china, manuscripts, and the
very chair that Mary Queen of Scots sat in when she heard of Darnley's
murder. I must lie down for a little, and Katharine must change her
dress (though she's wearing a very pretty one), but if you don't mind
being left alone, supper will be at eight. I dare say you'll write a
poem of your own while you're waiting. Ah, how I love the firelight!
Doesn't our room look charming?"

"Dear things!" she exclaimed. "Dear chairs and tables! How like old
friends they are--faithful, silent friends. Which reminds me, Katharine,
little Mr. Anning is coming to-night, and Tite Street, and Cadogan
Square.... Do remember to get that drawing of your great-uncle glazed.
Aunt Millicent remarked it last time she was here, and I know how it
would hurt me to see MY father in a broken glass."

A turn of
the street, a firelit room, something monumental in the procession
of the lamp-posts, who shall say what accident of light or shape had
suddenly changed the prospect within his mind, and led him to murmur
aloud:

"She'll do.... Yes, Katharine Hilbery'll do.... I'll take Katharine
Hilbery."

He lit his gas-fire and settled down in gloomy patience to await his
dinner. After sitting thus for some minutes a small girl popped her head
in to say,

"Mother says, aren't you coming down, Ralph? Uncle Joseph--"

"They're to bring my dinner up here," said Ralph, peremptorily;
whereupon she vanished, leaving the door ajar in her haste to be gone.
After Denham had waited some minutes, in the course of which neither
he nor the rook took their eyes off the fire, he muttered a curse, ran
downstairs, intercepted the parlor-maid, and cut himself a slice of
bread and cold meat. As he did so, the dining-room door sprang open, a
voice exclaimed "Ralph!" but Ralph paid no attention to the voice, and
made off upstairs with his plate. He set it down in a chair opposite
him, and ate with a ferocity that was due partly to anger and partly to
hunger. His mother, then, was determined not to respect his wishes; he
was a person of no importance in his own family; he was sent for and
treated as a child. He reflected, with a growing sense of injury, that
almost every one of his actions since opening the door of his room had
been won from the grasp of the family system. By rights, he should have
been sitting downstairs in the drawing-room describing his afternoon's
adventures, or listening to the afternoon's adventures of other people;
the room itself, the gas-fire, the arm-chair--all had been fought for;
the wretched bird, with half its feathers out and one leg lamed by a
cat, had been rescued under protest; but what his family most resented,
he reflected, was his wish for privacy. To dine alone, or to sit alone
after dinner, was flat rebellion, to be fought with every weapon
of underhand stealth or of open appeal. Which did he dislike
most--deception or tears? But, at any rate, they could not rob him of
his thoughts; they could not make him say where he had been or whom he
had seen. That was his own affair; that, indeed, was a step entirely in
the right direction, and, lighting his pipe, and cutting up the remains
of his meal for the benefit of the rook, Ralph calmed his rather
excessive irritation and settled down to think over his prospects.

He could remember Mr.
Fortescue's exact words, and the rolling emphasis with which he
delivered them, and he began to repeat what Mr. Fortescue had said, in
Mr. Fortescue's own manner, about Manchester. His mind then began to
wander about the house, and he wondered whether there were other rooms
like the drawing-room, and he thought, inconsequently, how beautiful the
bathroom must be, and how leisurely it was--the life of these well-kept
people, who were, no doubt, still sitting in the same room, only they
had changed their clothes, and little Mr. Anning was there, and the aunt
who would mind if the glass of her father's picture was broken. Miss
Hilbery had changed her dress ("although she's wearing such a pretty
one," he heard her mother say), and she was talking to Mr. Anning,
who was well over forty, and bald into the bargain, about books. How
peaceful and spacious it was; and the peace possessed him so completely
that his muscles slackened, his book drooped from his hand, and he
forgot that the hour of work was wasting minute by minute.

"Ralph?" said a voice, inquiringly.

"Joan?"

"I was coming up, but I saw your notice."

"Well, come along in, then." He concealed his desire beneath a tone as
grudging as he could make it.

Her gaze rested for a moment or two upon the rook. She then said,
without any preface:

"It's about Charles and Uncle John's offer.... Mother's been talking to
me. She says she can't afford to pay for him after this term. She says
she'll have to ask for an overdraft as it is."

"That's simply not true," said Ralph.

"No. I thought not. But she won't believe me when I say it."

Ralph, as if he could foresee the length of this familiar argument, drew
up a chair for his sister and sat down himself.

"I'm not interrupting?" she inquired.

Ralph shook his head, and for a time they sat silent. The lines curved
themselves in semicircles above their eyes.

"She doesn't understand that one's got to take risks," he observed,
finally.

"I believe mother would take risks if she knew that Charles was the sort
of boy to profit by it."

"He's got brains, hasn't he?" said Ralph. 

She wondered what it might
be, but at once recalled her mind, and assented.

"In some ways he's fearfully backward, though, compared with what you
were at his age. And he's difficult at home, too. He makes Molly slave
for him."

Ralph made a sound which belittled this particular argument. It was
plain to Joan that she had struck one of her brother's perverse moods,
and he was going to oppose whatever his mother said. He called her
"she," which was a proof of it. She sighed involuntarily, and the sigh
annoyed Ralph, and he exclaimed with irritation:

"It's pretty hard lines to stick a boy into an office at seventeen!"

"Nobody WANTS to stick him into an office," she said.

"The truth is," he observed gloomily, "that I ought to have accepted
Uncle John's offer. I should have been making six hundred a year by this
time."

"I don't think that for a moment," Joan replied quickly, repenting of
her annoyance. "The question, to my mind, is, whether we couldn't cut
down our expenses in some way."

"A smaller house?"

"Fewer servants, perhaps."

Neither brother nor sister spoke with much conviction, and after
reflecting for a moment what these proposed reforms in a strictly
economical household meant, Ralph announced very decidedly:

"It's out of the question."

"If mother won't run risks--"

"You really can't expect her to sell out again."

"She ought to look upon it as an investment; but if she won't, we must
find some other way, that's all."

"I think you'd be foolish to risk your money on poor old Charles,"
she observed. "Fond as I am of him, he doesn't seem to me exactly
brilliant.... Besides, why should you be sacrificed?"

"My dear Joan," Ralph exclaimed, stretching himself out with a gesture
of impatience, "don't you see that we've all got to be sacrificed?
What's the use of denying it? What's the use of struggling against it?
So it always has been, so it always will be. We've got no money and we
never shall have any money. We shall just turn round in the mill every
day of our lives until we drop and die, worn out, as most people do,
when one comes to think of it."

Joan looked at him, opened her lips as if to speak, and closed them
again. Then she said, very tentatively:

"Aren't you happy, Ralph?"

"No. Are you? Perhaps I'm as happy as most people, though. God knows
whether I'm happy or not. What is happiness?"

"Happiness," she remarked at length enigmatically, rather as if she were
sampling the word, and then she paused. She paused for a considerable
space, as if she were considering happiness in all its bearings. "Hilda
was here to-day," she suddenly resumed, as if they had never mentioned
happiness. "She brought Bobbie--he's a fine boy now." 

"Shall you talk to mother?" Joan inquired. "Because, you see, the
thing's got to be settled, one way or another. Charles must write to
Uncle John if he's going there."

Ralph sighed impatiently.

"I suppose it doesn't much matter either way," he exclaimed. "He's
doomed to misery in the long run."

A slight flush came into Joan's cheek.

"You know you're talking nonsense," she said. "It doesn't hurt any one
to have to earn their own living. I'm very glad I have to earn mine."

Ralph was pleased that she should feel this, and wished her to continue,
but he went on, perversely enough.

"Isn't that only because you've forgotten how to enjoy yourself? You
never have time for anything decent--"

"As for instance?"

"Well, going for walks, or music, or books, or seeing interesting
people. You never do anything that's really worth doing any more than I
do."

"I always think you could make this room much nicer, if you liked," she
observed.

"What does it matter what sort of room I have when I'm forced to spend
all the best years of my life drawing up deeds in an office?"

"You said two days ago that you found the law so interesting."

"So it is if one could afford to know anything about it."

("That's Herbert only just going to bed now," Joan interposed, as a
door on the landing slammed vigorously. "And then he won't get up in the
morning.")

"D'you ever pay calls now?" he asked abruptly.

"I don't often have the time. Why do you ask?"

"It might be a good thing, to get to know new people, that's all."

"Poor Ralph!" said Joan suddenly, with a smile. "You think your sister's
getting very old and very dull--that's it, isn't it?"

"I don't think anything of the kind," he said stoutly, but he flushed.
"But you lead a dog's life, Joan. When you're not working in an office,
you're worrying over the rest of us. And I'm not much good to you, I'm
afraid."


There were always visitors--uncles and aunts and cousins "from India,"
to be reverenced for their relationship alone, and others of the
solitary and formidable class, whom she was enjoined by her parents to
"remember all your life." By these means, and from hearing constant
talk of great men and their works, her earliest conceptions of the
world included an august circle of beings to whom she gave the names of
Shakespeare, Milton, Wordsworth, Shelley, and so on, who were, for some
reason, much more nearly akin to the Hilberys than to other people. 

Mrs. Hilbery examined the sheet of paper very carefully. Then she
clapped her hands and exclaimed enthusiastically:

"Well done, Katharine! What a wonderful head for business you've got!
Now I shall keep this before me, and every day I shall make a little
mark in my pocketbook, and on the last day of all--let me think, what
shall we do to celebrate the last day of all? If it weren't the winter
we could take a jaunt to Italy. They say Switzerland's very lovely in
the snow, except for the cold. But, as you say, the great thing is to
finish the book. Now let me see--"

Her common sense would assert itself almost brutally, and
Mrs. Hilbery, looking at her with her odd sidelong glance, that was half
malicious and half tender, would liken her to "your wicked old Uncle
Judge Peter, who used to be heard delivering sentence of death in the
bathroom. Thank Heaven, Katharine, I've not a drop of HIM in me!"

"And here we are," she said, half aloud, half satirically, yet with
evident pride, "talking about art."

She returned to the room, with a look of
steady pleasure in her eyes, and she was talking to Ralph Denham, who
followed her.

"Alone?" he said, as if he were pleasantly surprised by that fact.

"I am sometimes alone," she replied.

"But you expect a great many people," he added, looking round him. "It's
like a room on the stage. Who is it to-night?"

"William Rodney, upon the Elizabethan use of metaphor. I expect a good
solid paper, with plenty of quotations from the classics."

Ralph warmed his hands at the fire, which was flapping bravely in the
grate, while Mary took up her stocking again.

"I suppose you are the only woman in London who darns her own
stockings," he observed.

"I'm only one of a great many thousands really," she replied, "though I
must admit that I was thinking myself very remarkable when you came in.
And now that you're here I don't think myself remarkable at all. How
horrid of you! But I'm afraid you're much more remarkable than I am.
You've done much more than I've done."

"If that's your standard, you've nothing to be proud of," said Ralph
grimly.

"Well, I must reflect with Emerson that it's being and not doing that
matters," she continued.

"Emerson?" Ralph exclaimed, with derision. "You don't mean to say you
read Emerson?"

"Perhaps it wasn't Emerson; but why shouldn't I read Emerson?" she
asked, with a tinge of anxiety.

"There's no reason that I know of. It's the combination that's
odd--books and stockings. The combination is very odd." But it seemed
to recommend itself to him. Mary gave a little laugh, expressive of
happiness, and the particular stitches that she was now putting into her
work appeared to her to be done with singular grace and felicity. She
held out the stocking and looked at it approvingly.

"You always say that," she said. "I assure you it's a common
'combination,' as you call it, in the houses of the clergy. The only
thing that's odd about me is that I enjoy them both--Emerson and the
stocking."

A knock was heard, and Ralph exclaimed:

"Damn those people! I wish they weren't coming!"

"It's only Mr. Turner, on the floor below," said Mary, and she felt
grateful to Mr. Turner for having alarmed Ralph, and for having given a
false alarm.

"Will there be a crowd?" Ralph asked, after a pause.

"There'll be the Morrises and the Crashaws, and Dick Osborne, and
Septimus, and all that set. Katharine Hilbery is coming, by the way, so
William Rodney told me."

"Katharine Hilbery!" Ralph exclaimed.

"You know her?" Mary asked, with some surprise.

"I went to a tea-party at her house."

"But, in spite of what you say, I do admire her," she said. "I've only
seen her once or twice, but she seems to me to be what one calls a
'personality.'"

"I didn't mean to abuse her. I only felt that she wasn't very
sympathetic to me."

"They say she's going to marry that queer creature Rodney."

"Marry Rodney? Then she must be more deluded than I thought her."

"Now that's my door, all right," Mary exclaimed, carefully putting
her wools away, as a succession of knocks reverberated unnecessarily,
accompanied by a sound of people stamping their feet and laughing. A
moment later the room was full of young men and women, who came in with
a peculiar look of expectation, exclaimed "Oh!" when they saw Denham,
and then stood still, gaping rather foolishly.

But in a second these heterogeneous elements were all united by the
voice of Mr. Rodney, who suddenly strode up to the table, and began very
rapidly in high-strained tones:

"In undertaking to speak of the Elizabethan use of metaphor in poetry--"

Mr. Rodney was evidently so painfully conscious of
the oddity of his appearance, and his very redness and the starts to
which his body was liable gave such proof of his own discomfort,
that there was something endearing in this ridiculous susceptibility,
although most people would probably have echoed Denham's private
exclamation, "Fancy marrying a creature like that!"

Mr. Rodney acknowledged this with a wild glance round him, and, instead
of waiting to answer questions, he jumped up, thrust himself through
the seated bodies into the corner where Katharine was sitting, and
exclaimed, very audibly:

"Well, Katharine, I hope I've made a big enough fool of myself even for
you! It was terrible! terrible! terrible!"

"Hush! You must answer their questions," Katharine whispered, desiring,
at all costs, to keep him quiet. Oddly enough, when the speaker was no
longer in front of them, there seemed to be much that was suggestive in
what he had said. At any rate, a pale-faced young man with sad eyes was
already on his feet, delivering an accurately worded speech with perfect
composure. William Rodney listened with a curious lifting of his upper
lip, although his face was still quivering slightly with emotion.

"Idiot!" he whispered. "He's misunderstood every word I said!"

"Well then, answer him," Katharine whispered back.

"No, I shan't! They'd only laugh at me. Why did I let you persuade me
that these sort of people care for literature?" he continued.

Before long, therefore, the groups on the
mattresses and the groups on the chairs were all in communication with
each other, and Mary Datchet, who had begun to darn stockings again,
stooped down and remarked to Ralph:

"That was what I call a first-rate paper."

"Let's go and tell him how much we liked it," said Mary, thus suggesting
an action which Ralph was anxious to take, though without her he would
have been too proud to do it, for he suspected that he had more interest
in Katharine than she had in him.

"That was a very interesting paper," Mary began, without any shyness,
seating herself on the floor opposite to Rodney and Katharine. "Will you
lend me the manuscript to read in peace?"

Rodney, who had opened his eyes on their approach, regarded her for a
moment in suspicious silence.

"Do you say that merely to disguise the fact of my ridiculous failure?"
he asked.

Katharine looked up from her reading with a smile.

"He says he doesn't mind what we think of him," she remarked. "He says
we don't care a rap for art of any kind."

"I asked her to pity me, and she teases me!" Rodney exclaimed.

"I don't intend to pity you, Mr. Rodney," Mary remarked, kindly, but
firmly. "When a paper's a failure, nobody says anything, whereas now,
just listen to them!"

"D'you think that's all about my paper?" Rodney inquired, after a
moment's attention, with a distinct brightening of expression.

"Of course it is," said Mary. "It was a very suggestive paper."

She turned to Denham for confirmation, and he corroborated her.

"It's the ten minutes after a paper is read that proves whether it's
been a success or not," he said. "If I were you, Rodney, I should be
very pleased with myself."

"Did you agree at all, Denham, with what I said about Shakespeare's
later use of imagery? I'm afraid I didn't altogether make my meaning
plain."

Denham answered him with the brevity which is the result of having
another sentence in the mind to be addressed to another person. He
wished to say to Katharine: "Did you remember to get that picture glazed
before your aunt came to dinner?" but, besides having to answer Rodney,
he was not sure that the remark, with its assertion of intimacy, would
not strike Katharine as impertinent. She was listening to what some one
in another group was saying. Rodney, meanwhile, was talking about the
Elizabethan dramatists.

"You remember the passage just before the death of the Duchess?" he
continued, edging still closer to Denham, and adjusting his elbow and
knee in an incredibly angular combination. Here, Katharine, who had been
cut off by these maneuvers from all communication with the outer world,
rose, and seated herself upon the window-sill, where she was joined by
Mary Datchet. The two young women could thus survey the whole party.
Denham looked after them, and made as if he were tearing handfuls of
grass up by the roots from the carpet. But as it fell in accurately
with his conception of life that all one's desires were bound to be
frustrated, he concentrated his mind upon literature, and determined,
philosophically, to get what he could out of that.

"They're exactly like a flock of sheep, aren't they?" she said,
referring to the noise that rose from the scattered bodies beneath her.

Katharine turned and smiled.

"I wonder what they're making such a noise about?" she said.

"The Elizabethans, I suppose."

"No, I don't think it's got anything to do with the Elizabethans. There!
Didn't you hear them say, 'Insurance Bill'?"

"I wonder why men always talk about politics?" Mary speculated. "I
suppose, if we had votes, we should, too."

"I dare say we should. And you spend your life in getting us votes,
don't you?"

"I do," said Mary, stoutly. "From ten to six every day I'm at it."

Katharine looked at Ralph Denham, who was now pounding his way through
the metaphysics of metaphor with Rodney, and was reminded of his talk
that Sunday afternoon. She connected him vaguely with Mary.

"I suppose you're one of the people who think we should all have
professions," she said, rather distantly, as if feeling her way among
the phantoms of an unknown world.

"Oh dear no," said Mary at once.

"Well, I think I do," Katharine continued, with half a sigh. "You will
always be able to say that you've done something, whereas, in a crowd
like this, I feel rather melancholy."

"In a crowd? Why in a crowd?" Mary asked, deepening the two lines
between her eyes, and hoisting herself nearer to Katharine upon the
window-sill.

"Don't you see how many different things these people care about? And
I want to beat them down--I only mean," she corrected herself, "that I
want to assert myself, and it's difficult, if one hasn't a profession."

"Ah, but I want to trample upon their prostrate bodies!" Katharine
announced, a moment later, with a laugh, as if at the train of thought
which had led her to this conclusion.

"One doesn't necessarily trample upon people's bodies because one runs
an office," Mary remarked.

"No. Perhaps not," Katharine replied. The conversation lapsed, and Mary
saw Katharine looking out into the room rather moodily with closed lips,
the desire to talk about herself or to initiate a friendship having,
apparently, left her. Mary was struck by her capacity for being thus
easily silent, and occupied with her own thoughts. It was a habit that
spoke of loneliness and a mind thinking for itself. When Katharine
remained silent Mary was slightly embarrassed.

"Yes, they're very like sheep," she repeated, foolishly.

"And yet they are very clever--at least," Katharine added, "I suppose
they have all read Webster."

"Surely you don't think that a proof of cleverness? I've read Webster,
I've read Ben Jonson, but I don't think myself clever--not exactly, at
least."

"I think you must be very clever," Katharine observed.

"Why? Because I run an office?"

"I wasn't thinking of that. I was thinking how you live alone in this
room, and have parties."

Mary reflected for a second.

"It means, chiefly, a power of being disagreeable to one's own family,
I think. I have that, perhaps. I didn't want to live at home, and I
told my father. He didn't like it.... But then I have a sister, and you
haven't, have you?"

"No, I haven't any sisters."

"You are writing a life of your grandfather?" Mary pursued.

Katharine seemed instantly to be confronted by some familiar thought
from which she wished to escape. She replied, "Yes, I am helping my
mother," in such a way that Mary felt herself baffled, and put back
again into the position in which she had been at the beginning of their
talk. It seemed to her that Katharine possessed a curious power of
drawing near and receding, which sent alternate emotions through her
far more quickly than was usual, and kept her in a condition of
curious alertness. 

"She's an egoist," she said to herself, and stored that word up to
give to Ralph one day when, as it would certainly fall out, they were
discussing Miss Hilbery.

"Heavens, what a mess there'll be to-morrow morning!" Katharine
exclaimed. "I hope you don't sleep in this room, Miss Datchet?"

Mary laughed.

"What are you laughing at?" Katharine demanded.

"I won't tell you."

"Let me guess. You were laughing because you thought I'd changed the
conversation?"

"No."

"Because you think--" She paused.

"If you want to know, I was laughing at the way you said Miss Datchet."

"Mary, then. Mary, Mary, Mary."

"Mary Datchet," said Mary. "It's not such an imposing name as Katharine
Hilbery, I'm afraid."

Ralph had been watching for this moment, and he instantly produced his
sentence.

"I wonder, Miss Hilbery, whether you remembered to get that picture
glazed?" His voice showed that the question was one that had been
prepared.

"Oh, you idiot!" Mary exclaimed, very nearly aloud, with a sense that
Ralph had said something very stupid. So, after three lessons in Latin
grammar, one might correct a fellow student, whose knowledge did not
embrace the ablative of "mensa."

"Picture--what picture?" Katharine asked. "Oh, at home, you mean--that
Sunday afternoon. Was it the day Mr. Fortescue came? Yes, I think I
remembered it."

"You know the names of the stars, I suppose?" Denham remarked, and from
the tone of his voice one might have thought that he grudged Katharine
the knowledge he attributed to her.

She kept her voice steady with some difficulty.

"I know how to find the Pole star if I'm lost."

"I don't suppose that often happens to you."

"No. Nothing interesting ever happens to me," she said.

"I think you make a system of saying disagreeable things, Miss Hilbery,"
he broke out, again going further than he meant to. "I suppose it's one
of the characteristics of your class. They never talk seriously to their
inferiors."

"In what sense are you my inferior?" she asked, looking at him gravely,
as though honestly searching for his meaning. The look gave him great
pleasure. For the first time he felt himself on perfectly equal terms
with a woman whom he wished to think well of him, although he could
not have explained why her opinion of him mattered one way or another.
Perhaps, after all, he only wanted to have something of her to take home
to think about. But he was not destined to profit by his advantage.

"I don't think I understand what you mean," Katharine repeated, and then
she was obliged to stop and answer some one who wished to know whether
she would buy a ticket for an opera from them, at a reduction. Indeed,
the temper of the meeting was now unfavorable to separate conversation;
it had become rather debauched and hilarious, and people who scarcely
knew each other were making use of Christian names with apparent
cordiality, and had reached that kind of gay tolerance and general
friendliness which human beings in England only attain after sitting
together for three hours or so, and the first cold blast in the air
of the street freezes them into isolation once more. Cloaks were being
flung round the shoulders, hats swiftly pinned to the head; and Denham
had the mortification of seeing Katharine helped to prepare herself by
the ridiculous Rodney. It was not the convention of the meeting to say
good-bye, or necessarily even to nod to the person with whom one was
talking; but, nevertheless, Denham was disappointed by the completeness
with which Katharine parted from him, without any attempt to finish her
sentence. She left with Rodney.


The night was very still, and on such nights, when the traffic thins
away, the walker becomes conscious of the moon in the street, as if the
curtains of the sky had been drawn apart, and the heaven lay bare, as
it does in the country. The air was softly cool, so that people who
had been sitting talking in a crowd found it pleasant to walk a little
before deciding to stop an omnibus or encounter light again in an
underground railway. Sandys, who was a barrister with a philosophic
tendency, took out his pipe, lit it, murmured "hum" and "ha," and was
silent. 

On this occasion he began, while they waited for a minute on the edge of
the Strand:

"I hear that Bennett has given up his theory of truth."

Unconscious that they were observed, Katharine and Rodney had come out
on the Embankment. When they had crossed the road, Rodney slapped his
hand upon the stone parapet above the river and exclaimed:

"I promise I won't say another word about it, Katharine! But do stop a
minute and look at the moon upon the water."

"I'm sure one can smell the sea, with the wind blowing this way," she
said.

"Ah!" Rodney cried, striking his hand once more upon the balustrade,
"why can't one say how beautiful it all is? Why am I condemned for
ever, Katharine, to feel what I can't express? And the things I can give
there's no use in my giving. Trust me, Katharine," he added hastily,
"I won't speak of it again. But in the presence of beauty--look at
the iridescence round the moon!--one feels--one feels--Perhaps if you
married me--I'm half a poet, you see, and I can't pretend not to feel
what I do feel. If I could write--ah, that would be another matter. I
shouldn't bother you to marry me then, Katharine."

He spoke these disconnected sentences rather abruptly, with his eyes
alternately upon the moon and upon the stream.

"But for me I suppose you would recommend marriage?" said Katharine,
with her eyes fixed on the moon.

"Certainly I should. Not for you only, but for all women. Why, you're
nothing at all without it; you're only half alive; using only half
your faculties; you must feel that for yourself. That is why--" Here he
stopped himself, and they began to walk slowly along the Embankment, the
moon fronting them.

    "With how sad steps she climbs the sky,
    How silently and with how wan a face,"

Rodney quoted.

"I've been told a great many unpleasant things about myself to-night,"
Katharine stated, without attending to him. "Mr. Denham seems to think
it his mission to lecture me, though I hardly know him. By the way,
William, you know him; tell me, what is he like?"

William drew a deep sigh.

"We may lecture you till we're blue in the face--"

"Yes--but what's he like?"

"And we write sonnets to your eyebrows, you cruel practical creature.
Denham?" he added, as Katharine remained silent. "A good fellow, I
should think. He cares, naturally, for the right sort of things, I
expect. But you mustn't marry him, though. He scolded you, did he--what
did he say?"

"What happens with Mr. Denham is this: He comes to tea. I do all I can
to put him at his ease. He merely sits and scowls at me. Then I show him
our manuscripts. At this he becomes really angry, and tells me I've no
business to call myself a middle-class woman. So we part in a huff; and
next time we meet, which was to-night, he walks straight up to me, and
says, 'Go to the Devil!' That's the sort of behavior my mother complains
of. I want to know, what does it mean?"

She paused and, slackening her steps, looked at the lighted train
drawing itself smoothly over Hungerford Bridge.

"It means, I should say, that he finds you chilly and unsympathetic."

"It's time I jumped into a cab and hid myself in my own house," she
exclaimed.

"Would your mother object to my being seen with you? No one could
possibly recognize us, could they?" Rodney inquired, with some
solicitude.

"You may laugh, Katharine, but I can tell you that if any of your
friends saw us together at this time of night they would talk about it,
and I should find that very disagreeable. But why do you laugh?"

"I don't know. Because you're such a queer mixture, I think. You're half
poet and half old maid."

"I know I always seem to you highly ridiculous. But I can't help having
inherited certain traditions and trying to put them into practice."

"Nonsense, William. You may come of the oldest family in Devonshire,
but that's no reason why you should mind being seen alone with me on the
Embankment."

"I'm ten years older than you are, Katharine, and I know more of the
world than you do."

"Very well. Leave me and go home."

Rodney looked back over his shoulder and perceived that they were being
followed at a short distance by a taxicab, which evidently awaited his
summons. Katharine saw it, too, and exclaimed:

"Don't call that cab for me, William. I shall walk."

"Nonsense, Katharine; you'll do nothing of the kind. It's nearly twelve
o'clock, and we've walked too far as it is."

Katharine laughed and walked on so quickly that both Rodney and the
taxicab had to increase their pace to keep up with her.

"Now, William," she said, "if people see me racing along the Embankment
like this they WILL talk. You had far better say good-night, if you
don't want people to talk."

At this William beckoned, with a despotic gesture, to the cab with one
hand, and with the other he brought Katharine to a standstill.

"Don't let the man see us struggling, for God's sake!" he murmured.
Katharine stood for a moment quite still.

"There's more of the old maid in you than the poet," she observed
briefly.

"Of all the unreasonable, inconsiderate creatures I've ever known, she's
the worst!" he exclaimed to himself, striding back along the Embankment.
"Heaven forbid that I should ever make a fool of myself with her
again. Why, I'd sooner marry the daughter of my landlady than Katharine
Hilbery! She'd leave me not a moment's peace--and she'd never understand
me--never, never, never!"

"Ha!" Rodney exclaimed.

"You do well, Denham," he began impulsively, "to have nothing to do
with young women. I offer you my experience--if one trusts them one
invariably has cause to repent. Not that I have any reason at this
moment," he added hastily, "to complain of them. It's a subject that
crops up now and again for no particular reason. Miss Datchet, I dare
say, is one of the exceptions. Do you like Miss Datchet?"

He looked along the road,
and marked a lamp-post at a distance of some hundred yards, and decided
that he would part from Rodney when they reached this point.

"Yes, I like Mary; I don't see how one could help liking her," he
remarked cautiously, with his eye on the lamp-post.

"Ah, Denham, you're so different from me. You never give yourself away.
I watched you this evening with Katharine Hilbery. My instinct is to
trust the person I'm talking to. That's why I'm always being taken in, I
suppose."

"Who's taken you in now?" he asked. "Katharine Hilbery?"

"Katharine Hilbery," he repeated, with a curious little chuckle. "No,
Denham, I have no illusions about that young woman. I think I made that
plain to her to-night. But don't run away with a false impression,"
he continued eagerly, turning and linking his arm through Denham's, as
though to prevent him from escaping; and, thus compelled, Denham passed
the monitory lamp-post, to which, in passing, he breathed an excuse, for
how could he break away when Rodney's arm was actually linked in his?
"You must not think that I have any bitterness against her--far from it.
It's not altogether her fault, poor girl. She lives, you know, one of
those odious, self-centered lives--at least, I think them odious for a
woman--feeding her wits upon everything, having control of everything,
getting far too much her own way at home--spoilt, in a sense, feeling
that every one is at her feet, and so not realizing how she hurts--that
is, how rudely she behaves to people who haven't all her advantages.
Still, to do her justice, she's no fool," he added, as if to warn
Denham not to take any liberties. "She has taste. She has sense. She can
understand you when you talk to her. But she's a woman, and there's an
end of it," he added, with another little chuckle, and dropped Denham's
arm.

"And did you tell her all this to-night?" Denham asked.

"Oh dear me, no. I should never think of telling Katharine the truth
about herself. That wouldn't do at all. One has to be in an attitude of
adoration in order to get on with Katharine."

"Now I've learnt that she's refused to marry him why don't I go home?"
Denham thought to himself. But he went on walking beside Rodney, and for
a time they did not speak, though Rodney hummed snatches of a tune out
of an opera by Mozart. A feeling of contempt and liking combine
very naturally in the mind of one to whom another has just spoken
unpremeditatedly, revealing rather more of his private feelings than he
intended to reveal. Denham began to wonder what sort of person Rodney
was, and at the same time Rodney began to think about Denham.

"You're a slave like me, I suppose?" he asked.

"A solicitor, yes."

"I sometimes wonder why we don't chuck it. Why don't you emigrate,
Denham? I should have thought that would suit you."

"I've a family."

"I'm often on the point of going myself. And then I know I couldn't live
without this"--and he waved his hand towards the City of London, which
wore, at this moment, the appearance of a town cut out of gray-blue
cardboard, and pasted flat against the sky, which was of a deeper blue.

"There are one or two people I'm fond of, and there's a little good
music, and a few pictures, now and then--just enough to keep one
dangling about here. Ah, but I couldn't live with savages! Are you fond
of books? Music? Pictures? D'you care at all for first editions? I've
got a few nice things up here, things I pick up cheap, for I can't
afford to give what they ask."

 Rodney's rooms were small, but
the sitting-room window looked out into a courtyard, with its flagged
pavement, and its single tree, and across to the flat red-brick fronts
of the opposite houses, which would not have surprised Dr. Johnson, if
he had come out of his grave for a turn in the moonlight. Rodney lit
his lamp, pulled his curtains, offered Denham a chair, and, flinging
the manuscript of his paper on the Elizabethan use of Metaphor on to the
table, exclaimed:

"Oh dear me, what a waste of time! But it's over now, and so we may
think no more about it."

"The Baskerville Congreve," said Rodney, offering it to his guest. "I
couldn't read him in a cheap edition."

"Well, Rodney," said Denham, as he filled his pipe and looked about him,
"this is all very nice and comfortable."

"Tolerable," he muttered.

"But I dare say it's just as well that you have to earn your own
living."

"If you mean that I shouldn't do anything good with leisure if I had
it, I dare say you're right. But I should be ten times as happy with my
whole day to spend as I liked."

"I doubt that," Denham replied.

"I could spend three hours every day reading Shakespeare," Rodney
remarked. "And there's music and pictures, let alone the society of the
people one likes."

"You'd be bored to death in a year's time."

"Oh, I grant you I should be bored if I did nothing. But I should write
plays."

"H'm!"

"I should write plays," he repeated. "I've written three-quarters of one
already, and I'm only waiting for a holiday to finish it. And it's not
bad--no, some of it's really rather nice."

"Well,... will you let me see the play?" Denham asked, and Rodney looked
immediately appeased, but, nevertheless, he sat silent for a moment,
holding the poker perfectly upright in the air, regarding it with his
rather prominent eyes, and opening his lips and shutting them again.

"Do you really care for this kind of thing?" he asked at length, in a
different tone of voice from that in which he had been speaking. And,
without waiting for an answer, he went on, rather querulously: "Very few
people care for poetry. I dare say it bores you."

"Perhaps," Denham remarked.

"Well, I'll lend it you," Rodney announced, putting down the poker.


"I shall look in again some time," Denham remarked, upon which Rodney
held up his hand, containing his manuscript, without saying anything
except--"If you like."

"The bare branches against the sky do one so much GOOD," Mrs. Seal
asserted, looking out into the Square.

"But one can't lunch off trees, Sally," said Mary.

"I confess I don't know how you manage it, Miss Datchet," Mr. Clacton
remarked. "I should sleep all the afternoon, I know, if I took a heavy
meal in the middle of the day."

"What's the very latest thing in literature?" Mary asked, good-humoredly
pointing to the yellow-covered volume beneath Mr. Clacton's arm, for he
invariably read some new French author at lunch-time, or squeezed in
a visit to a picture gallery, balancing his social work with an ardent
culture of which he was secretly proud, as Mary had very soon divined.

So they parted and Mary walked away, wondering if they guessed that she
really wanted to get away from them, and supposing that they had not
quite reached that degree of subtlety. She bought herself an evening
paper, which she read as she ate, looking over the top of it again
and again at the queer people who were buying cakes or imparting their
secrets, until some young woman whom she knew came in, and she called
out, "Eleanor, come and sit by me," and they finished their lunch
together, parting on the strip of pavement among the different lines of
traffic with a pleasant feeling that they were stepping once more into
their separate places in the great and eternally moving pattern of human
life.



But, instead of going straight back to the office to-day, Mary turned
into the British Museum, and strolled down the gallery with the shapes
of stone until she found an empty seat directly beneath the gaze of the
Elgin marbles. She looked at them, and seemed, as usual, borne up on
some wave of exaltation and emotion, by which her life at once became
solemn and beautiful--an impression which was due as much, perhaps,
to the solitude and chill and silence of the gallery as to the actual
beauty of the statues. One must suppose, at least, that her emotions
were not purely esthetic, because, after she had gazed at the Ulysses
for a minute or two, she began to think about Ralph Denham. So secure
did she feel with these silent shapes that she almost yielded to an
impulse to say "I am in love with you" aloud. The presence of this
immense and enduring beauty made her almost alarmingly conscious of her
desire, and at the same time proud of a feeling which did not display
anything like the same proportions when she was going about her daily
work.

"That is what you can do," she went on, moving on to the next statue.
"You always make people do what you want."

A glow spread over her spirit, and filled her eyes with brightness.
Nevertheless, before she left the Museum she was very far from saying,
even in the privacy of her own mind, "I am in love with you," and that
sentence might very well never have framed itself. She was, indeed,
rather annoyed with herself for having allowed such an ill-considered
breach of her reserve, weakening her powers of resistance, she felt,
should this impulse return again. For, as she walked along the street to
her office, the force of all her customary objections to being in love
with any one overcame her. She did not want to marry at all. It seemed
to her that there was something amateurish in bringing love into touch
with a perfectly straightforward friendship, such as hers was with
Ralph, which, for two years now, had based itself upon common interests
in impersonal topics, such as the housing of the poor, or the taxation
of land values.


But the afternoon spirit differed intrinsically from the morning spirit.
Mary found herself watching the flight of a bird, or making drawings of
the branches of the plane-trees upon her blotting-paper. People came in
to see Mr. Clacton on business, and a seductive smell of cigarette smoke
issued from his room. Mrs. Seal wandered about with newspaper cuttings,
which seemed to her either "quite splendid" or "really too bad for
words." She used to paste these into books, or send them to her friends,
having first drawn a broad bar in blue pencil down the margin, a
proceeding which signified equally and indistinguishably the depths of
her reprobation or the heights of her approval.

About four o'clock on that same afternoon Katharine Hilbery was walking
up Kingsway. The question of tea presented itself. The street lamps were
being lit already, and as she stood still for a moment beneath one of
them, she tried to think of some neighboring drawing-room where there
would be firelight and talk congenial to her mood. That mood, owing to
the spinning traffic and the evening veil of unreality, was ill-adapted
to her home surroundings. Perhaps, on the whole, a shop was the best
place in which to preserve this queer sense of heightened existence.
At the same time she wished to talk. Remembering Mary Datchet and her
repeated invitations, she crossed the road, turned into Russell Square,
and peered about, seeking for numbers with a sense of adventure that was
out of all proportion to the deed itself. She found herself in a dimly
lighted hall, unguarded by a porter, and pushed open the first swing
door. But the office-boy had never heard of Miss Datchet. Did she belong
to the S.R.F.R.? Katharine shook her head with a smile of dismay. A
voice from within shouted, "No. The S.G.S.--top floor."

Katharine mounted past innumerable glass doors, with initials on them,
and became steadily more and more doubtful of the wisdom of her venture.
At the top she paused for a moment to breathe and collect herself.
She heard the typewriter and formal professional voices inside, not
belonging, she thought, to any one she had ever spoken to. She touched
the bell, and the door was opened almost immediately by Mary herself.
Her face had to change its expression entirely when she saw Katharine.

"You!" she exclaimed. "We thought you were the printer." Still holding
the door open, she called back, "No, Mr. Clacton, it's not Penningtons.
I should ring them up again--double three double eight, Central. Well,
this is a surprise. Come in," she added. "You're just in time for tea."

but Mary immediately recalled her.

"It was very clever of you to find your way," she said, and Katharine
wondered, as she stood there, feeling, for the moment, entirely detached
and unabsorbed, why she had come. She looked, indeed, to Mary's eyes
strangely out of place in the office. Her figure in the long cloak,
which took deep folds, and her face, which was composed into a mask of
sensitive apprehension, disturbed Mary for a moment with a sense of
the presence of some one who was of another world, and, therefore,
subversive of her world. She became immediately anxious that Katharine
should be impressed by the importance of her world, and hoped that
neither Mrs. Seal nor Mr. Clacton would appear until the impression of
importance had been received. But in this she was disappointed. Mrs.
Seal burst into the room holding a kettle in her hand, which she set
upon the stove, and then, with inefficient haste, she set light to the
gas, which flared up, exploded, and went out.

"Always the way, always the way," she muttered. "Kit Markham is the only
person who knows how to deal with the thing."

Mary had to go to her help, and together they spread the table, and
apologized for the disparity between the cups and the plainness of the
food.

"If we had known Miss Hilbery was coming, we should have bought a cake,"
said Mary, upon which Mrs. Seal looked at Katharine for the first time,
suspiciously, because she was a person who needed cake.

Here Mr. Clacton opened the door, and came in, holding a typewritten
letter in his hand, which he was reading aloud.

"Salford's affiliated," he said.

"Well done, Salford!" Mrs. Seal exclaimed enthusiastically, thumping the
teapot which she held upon the table, in token of applause.

"Yes, these provincial centers seem to be coming into line at last,"
said Mr. Clacton, and then Mary introduced him to Miss Hilbery, and
he asked her, in a very formal manner, if she were interested "in our
work."

"And the proofs still not come?" said Mrs. Seal, putting both her elbows
on the table, and propping her chin on her hands, as Mary began to pour
out tea. "It's too bad--too bad. At this rate we shall miss the
country post. Which reminds me, Mr. Clacton, don't you think we should
circularize the provinces with Partridge's last speech? What? You've not
read it? Oh, it's the best thing they've had in the House this Session.
Even the Prime Minister--"

But Mary cut her short.

"We don't allow shop at tea, Sally," she said firmly. "We fine her a
penny each time she forgets, and the fines go to buying a plum cake,"
she explained, seeking to draw Katharine into the community. She had
given up all hope of impressing her.

"I'm sorry, I'm sorry," Mrs. Seal apologized. "It's my misfortune to be
an enthusiast," she said, turning to Katharine. "My father's daughter
could hardly be anything else. I think I've been on as many committees
as most people. Waifs and Strays, Rescue Work, Church Work, C. O.
S.--local branch--besides the usual civic duties which fall to one as a
householder. But I've given them all up for our work here, and I don't
regret it for a second," she added. "This is the root question, I feel;
until women have votes--"

"It'll be sixpence, at least, Sally," said Mary, bringing her fist down
on the table. "And we're all sick to death of women and their votes."

Mrs. Seal looked for a moment as though she could hardly believe her
ears, and made a deprecating "tut-tut-tut" in her throat, looking
alternately at Katharine and Mary, and shaking her head as she did so.
Then she remarked, rather confidentially to Katharine, with a little nod
in Mary's direction:

"She's doing more for the cause than any of us. She's giving her
youth--for, alas! when I was young there were domestic circumstances--"
she sighed, and stopped short.

"Yes, I took my little bag into the square," said Mrs. Seal, with the
self-conscious guilt of a child owning some fault to its elders. "It was
really very sustaining, and the bare boughs against the sky do one
so much GOOD. But I shall have to give up going into the square," she
proceeded, wrinkling her forehead. "The injustice of it! Why should I
have a beautiful square all to myself, when poor women who need rest
have nowhere at all to sit?" She looked fiercely at Katharine, giving
her short locks a little shake. "It's dreadful what a tyrant one still
is, in spite of all one's efforts. One tries to lead a decent life,
but one can't. Of course, directly one thinks of it, one sees that ALL
squares should be open to EVERY ONE. Is there any society with that
object, Mr. Clacton? If not, there should be, surely."

"A most excellent object," said Mr. Clacton in his professional manner.
"At the same time, one must deplore the ramification of organizations,
Mrs. Seal. So much excellent effort thrown away, not to speak of pounds,
shillings, and pence. Now how many organizations of a philanthropic
nature do you suppose there are in the City of London itself, Miss
Hilbery?" he added, screwing his mouth into a queer little smile, as if
to show that the question had its frivolous side.

"Well, there are more in this house than I'd any notion of," she said.
"On the ground floor you protect natives, on the next you emigrate women
and tell people to eat nuts--"

"Why do you say that 'we' do these things?" Mary interposed, rather
sharply. "We're not responsible for all the cranks who choose to lodge
in the same house with us."



"You don't belong to our society, then?" said Mrs. Seal.

"No, I'm afraid I don't," said Katharine, with such ready candor that
Mrs. Seal was nonplussed, and stared at her with a puzzled expression,
as if she could not classify her among the varieties of human beings
known to her.

"But surely," she began.

"Mrs. Seal is an enthusiast in these matters," said Mr. Clacton, almost
apologetically. "We have to remind her sometimes that others have a
right to their views even if they differ from our own.... "Punch" has
a very funny picture this week, about a Suffragist and an agricultural
laborer. Have you seen this week's "Punch," Miss Datchet?"

Mary laughed, and said "No."

Mr. Clacton then told them the substance of the joke, which, however,
depended a good deal for its success upon the expression which the
artist had put into the people's faces. Mrs. Seal sat all the time
perfectly grave. Directly he had done speaking she burst out:

"But surely, if you care about the welfare of your sex at all, you must
wish them to have the vote?"

"I never said I didn't wish them to have the vote," Katharine protested.

"Then why aren't you a member of our society?" Mrs. Seal demanded.

Katharine stirred her spoon round and round, stared into the swirl of
the tea, and remained silent. Mr. Clacton, meanwhile, framed a question
which, after a moment's hesitation, he put to Katharine.

"Are you in any way related, I wonder, to the poet Alardyce? His
daughter, I believe, married a Mr. Hilbery."

"Yes; I'm the poet's granddaughter," said Katharine, with a little sigh,
after a pause; and for a moment they were all silent.

"The poet's granddaughter!" Mrs. Seal repeated, half to herself, with a
shake of her head, as if that explained what was otherwise inexplicable.

The light kindled in Mr. Clacton's eye.

"Ah, indeed. That interests me very much," he said. "I owe a great debt
to your grandfather, Miss Hilbery. At one time I could have repeated
the greater part of him by heart. But one gets out of the way of reading
poetry, unfortunately. You don't remember him, I suppose?"

A sharp rap at the door made Katharine's answer inaudible. Mrs. Seal
looked up with renewed hope in her eyes, and exclaiming:

"The proofs at last!" ran to open the door. "Oh, it's only Mr. Denham!"
she cried, without any attempt to conceal her disappointment. Ralph,
Katharine supposed, was a frequent visitor, for the only person he
thought it necessary to greet was herself, and Mary at once explained
the strange fact of her being there by saying:

"Katharine has come to see how one runs an office."

Ralph felt himself stiffen uncomfortably, as he said:

"I hope Mary hasn't persuaded you that she knows how to run an office?"

"What, doesn't she?" said Katharine, looking from one to the other.

At these remarks Mrs. Seal began to exhibit signs of discomposure, which
displayed themselves by a tossing movement of her head, and, as Ralph
took a letter from his pocket, and placed his finger upon a certain
sentence, she forestalled him by exclaiming in confusion:

"Now, I know what you're going to say, Mr. Denham! But it was the
day Kit Markham was here, and she upsets one so--with her wonderful
vitality, always thinking of something new that we ought to be doing and
aren't--and I was conscious at the time that my dates were mixed. It had
nothing to do with Mary at all, I assure you."

"My dear Sally, don't apologize," said Mary, laughing. "Men are such
pedants--they don't know what things matter, and what things don't."

"Now, Denham, speak up for our sex," said Mr. Clacton in a jocular
manner, indeed, but like most insignificant men he was very quick to
resent being found fault with by a woman, in argument with whom he was
fond of calling himself "a mere man." He wished, however, to enter into
a literary conservation with Miss Hilbery, and thus let the matter drop.

"Doesn't it seem strange to you, Miss Hilbery," he said, "that the
French, with all their wealth of illustrious names, have no poet who can
compare with your grandfather? Let me see. There's Chenier and Hugo
and Alfred de Musset--wonderful men, but, at the same time, there's a
richness, a freshness about Alardyce--"

ere the telephone bell rang, and he had to absent himself with a smile
and a bow which signified that, although literature is delightful, it
is not work. Mrs. Seal rose at the same time, but remained hovering over
the table, delivering herself of a tirade against party government. "For
if I were to tell you what I know of back-stairs intrigue, and what can
be done by the power of the purse, you wouldn't credit me, Mr. Denham,
you wouldn't, indeed. Which is why I feel that the only work for my
father's daughter--for he was one of the pioneers, Mr. Denham, and on
his tombstone I had that verse from the Psalms put, about the sowers
and the seed.... And what wouldn't I give that he should be alive now,
seeing what we're going to see--" but reflecting that the glories of the
future depended in part upon the activity of her typewriter, she bobbed
her head, and hurried back to the seclusion of her little room, from
which immediately issued sounds of enthusiastic, but obviously erratic,
composition.

"The standard of morality seems to me frightfully low," she observed
reflectively, pouring out a second cup of tea, "especially among women
who aren't well educated. They don't see that small things matter,
and that's where the leakage begins, and then we find ourselves in
difficulties--I very nearly lost my temper yesterday," she went on,
looking at Ralph with a little smile, as though he knew what happened
when she lost her temper. "It makes me very angry when people tell me
lies--doesn't it make you angry?" she asked Katharine.

"But considering that every one tells lies," Katharine remarked, looking
about the room to see where she had put down her umbrella and her
parcel, for there was an intimacy in the way in which Mary and Ralph
addressed each other which made her wish to leave them. Mary, on the
other hand, was anxious, superficially at least, that Katharine should
stay and so fortify her in her determination not to be in love with
Ralph.

"I don't think that I tell lies, and I don't think that Ralph tells
lies, do you, Ralph?" Mary continued.

"Mary Datchet does that sort of work very well.... She's responsible for
it, I suppose?"

"Yes. The others don't help at all.... Has she made a convert of you?"

"Oh no. That is, I'm a convert already."

"But she hasn't persuaded you to work for them?"

"Oh dear no--that wouldn't do at all."

"Suppose we get on to that omnibus?" he suggested.

Katharine acquiesced, and they climbed up, and found themselves alone on
top of it.

"But which way are you going?" Katharine asked, waking a little from the
trance into which movement among moving things had thrown her.

"I'm going to the Temple," Ralph replied, inventing a destination on the
spur of the moment. He felt the change come over her as they sat down
and the omnibus began to move forward. He imagined her contemplating the
avenue in front of them with those honest sad eyes which seemed to set
him at such a distance from them. But the breeze was blowing in their
faces; it lifted her hat for a second, and she drew out a pin and stuck
it in again,--a little action which seemed, for some reason, to make her
rather more fallible. Ah, if only her hat would blow off, and leave her
altogether disheveled, accepting it from his hands!

"This is like Venice," she observed, raising her hand. "The motor-cars,
I mean, shooting about so quickly, with their lights."

"I've never seen Venice," he replied. "I keep that and some other things
for my old age."

"What are the other things?" she asked.

"There's Venice and India and, I think, Dante, too."

She laughed.

"Think of providing for one's old age! And would you refuse to see
Venice if you had the chance?"

Instead of answering her, he wondered whether he should tell her
something that was quite true about himself; and as he wondered, he told
her.

"I've planned out my life in sections ever since I was a child, to make
it last longer. You see, I'm always afraid that I'm missing something--"

"And so am I!" Katharine exclaimed. "But, after all," she added, "why
should you miss anything?"

"Why? Because I'm poor, for one thing," Ralph rejoined. "You, I suppose,
can have Venice and India and Dante every day of your life."

"But to know that one might have things doesn't alter the fact that one
hasn't got them," she said, in some confusion. "How could I go to India,
for example? Besides," she began impulsively, and stopped herself. Here
the conductor came round, and interrupted them. Ralph waited for her to
resume her sentence, but she said no more.

"I have a message to give your father," he remarked. "Perhaps you would
give it him, or I could come--"

"Yes, do come," Katharine replied.

"Still, I don't see why you shouldn't go to India," Ralph began, in
order to keep her from rising, as she threatened to do.

"And little Augustus Pelham said to me, 'It's the younger generation
knocking at the door,' and I said to him, 'Oh, but the younger
generation comes in without knocking, Mr. Pelham.' Such a feeble little
joke, wasn't it, but down it went into his notebook all the same."

"Let us congratulate ourselves that we shall be in the grave before that
work is published," said Mr. Hilbery.

"The only excuse for you, Katharine, is that dinner is still later than
you are," said Mr. Hilbery, putting down his spectacles.

"I don't mind her being late when the result is so charming," said Mrs.
Hilbery, looking with pride at her daughter. "Still, I don't know that I
LIKE your being out so late, Katharine," she continued. "You took a cab,
I hope?"

"That's more cheerful," she exclaimed. "D'you know, Katharine, that
ridiculous goose came to tea with me? Oh, how I wanted you! He tried to
make epigrams all the time, and I got so nervous, expecting them, you
know, that I spilt the tea--and he made an epigram about that!"

"Which ridiculous goose?" Katharine asked her father.

"Only one of my geese, happily, makes epigrams--Augustus Pelham, of
course," said Mrs. Hilbery.

"I'm not sorry that I was out," said Katharine.

"Poor Augustus!" Mrs. Hilbery exclaimed. "But we're all too hard on him.
Remember how devoted he is to his tiresome old mother."

"That's only because she is his mother. Any one connected with
himself--"

"No, no, Katharine--that's too bad. That's--what's the word I mean,
Trevor, something long and Latin--the sort of word you and Katharine
know--"

Mr. Hilbery suggested "cynical."

"Well, that'll do. I don't believe in sending girls to college, but I
should teach them that sort of thing. It makes one feel so dignified,
bringing out these little allusions, and passing on gracefully to the
next topic. But I don't know what's come over me--I actually had to ask
Augustus the name of the lady Hamlet was in love with, as you were out,
Katharine, and Heaven knows what he mayn't put down about me in his
diary."

"I wish," Katharine started, with great impetuosity, and checked
herself. Her mother always stirred her to feel and think quickly, and
then she remembered that her father was there, listening with attention.

"What is it you wish?" he asked, as she paused.

He often surprised her, thus, into telling him what she had not meant to
tell him; and then they argued, while Mrs. Hilbery went on with her own
thoughts.

"I wish mother wasn't famous. I was out at tea, and they would talk to
me about poetry."

"Thinking you must be poetical, I see--and aren't you?"

"Who's been talking to you about poetry, Katharine?" Mrs. Hilbery
demanded, and Katharine was committed to giving her parents an account
of her visit to the Suffrage office.

"They have an office at the top of one of the old houses in Russell
Square. I never saw such queer-looking people. And the man discovered
I was related to the poet, and talked to me about poetry. Even Mary
Datchet seems different in that atmosphere."

"Yes, the office atmosphere is very bad for the soul," said Mr. Hilbery.

"I don't remember any offices in Russell Square in the old days, when
Mamma lived there," Mrs. Hilbery mused, "and I can't fancy turning one
of those noble great rooms into a stuffy little Suffrage office. Still,
if the clerks read poetry there must be something nice about them."

"No, because they don't read it as we read it," Katharine insisted.

"But it's nice to think of them reading your grandfather, and not
filling up those dreadful little forms all day long," Mrs. Hilbery
persisted, her notion of office life being derived from some chance view
of a scene behind the counter at her bank, as she slipped the sovereigns
into her purse.

"At any rate, they haven't made a convert of Katharine, which was what I
was afraid of," Mr. Hilbery remarked.

"Oh no," said Katharine very decidedly, "I wouldn't work with them for
anything."

"It's curious," Mr. Hilbery continued, agreeing with his daughter, "how
the sight of one's fellow-enthusiasts always chokes one off. They
show up the faults of one's cause so much more plainly than one's
antagonists. One can be enthusiastic in one's study, but directly one
comes into touch with the people who agree with one, all the glamor
goes. So I've always found," and he proceeded to tell them, as he peeled
his apple, how he committed himself once, in his youthful days, to make
a speech at a political meeting, and went there ablaze with enthusiasm
for the ideals of his own side; but while his leaders spoke, he became
gradually converted to the other way of thinking, if thinking it could
be called, and had to feign illness in order to avoid making a fool of
himself--an experience which had sickened him of public meetings.

"Oh, Katharine," she exclaimed, "how you've made me think of Mamma and
the old days in Russell Square! I can see the chandeliers, and the
green silk of the piano, and Mamma sitting in her cashmere shawl by
the window, singing till the little ragamuffin boys outside stopped to
listen. Papa sent me in with a bunch of violets while he waited round
the corner. It must have been a summer evening. That was before things
were hopeless...."

"If they'd lived now," she concluded, "I feel it wouldn't have happened.
People aren't so set upon tragedy as they were then. If my father had
been able to go round the world, or if she'd had a rest cure, everything
would have come right. But what could I do? And then they had bad
friends, both of them, who made mischief. Ah, Katharine, when you marry,
be quite, quite sure that you love your husband!"

While comforting her, Katharine thought to herself, "Now this is what
Mary Datchet and Mr. Denham don't understand. This is the sort of
position I'm always getting into. How simple it must be to live as they
do!" for all the evening she had been comparing her home and her father
and mother with the Suffrage office and the people there.


"But, Katharine," Mrs. Hilbery continued, with one of her sudden changes
of mood, "though, Heaven knows, I don't want to see you married,
surely if ever a man loved a woman, William loves you. And it's a nice,
rich-sounding name too--Katharine Rodney, which, unfortunately, doesn't
mean that he's got any money, because he hasn't."

The alteration of her name annoyed Katharine, and she observed, rather
sharply, that ^she didn't want to marry any one.^

"It's very dull that you can only marry one husband, certainly," Mrs.
Hilbery reflected. "I always wish that you could marry everybody who
wants to marry you. Perhaps they'll come to that in time, but meanwhile
I confess that dear William--" But here Mr. Hilbery came in, and the
more solid part of the evening began. This consisted in the reading
aloud by Katharine from some prose work or other, while her mother
knitted scarves intermittently on a little circular frame, and her
father read the newspaper, not so attentively but that he could comment
humorously now and again upon the fortunes of the hero and the heroine.
The Hilberys subscribed to a library, which delivered books on Tuesdays
and Fridays, and Katharine did her best to interest her parents in the
works of living and highly respectable authors; but Mrs. Hilbery was
perturbed by the very look of the light, gold-wreathed volumes, and
would make little faces as if she tasted something bitter as the reading
went on; while Mr. Hilbery would treat the moderns with a curious
elaborate banter such as one might apply to the antics of a promising
child. So this evening, after five pages or so of one of these masters,
Mrs. Hilbery protested that it was all too clever and cheap and nasty
for words.

"Please, Katharine, read us something REAL."