
"Yes, of course, if it's fine tomorrow," said Mrs. Ramsay. "But you'll
have to be up with the lark," she added.


"But," said his father, stopping in front of the drawing-room window, "it
won't be fine."


"But it may be fine--I expect it will be fine," said Mrs. Ramsay, making
some little twist of the reddish brown stocking she was knitting,
impatiently. If she finished it tonight, if they did go to the Lighthouse
after all, it was to be given to the Lighthouse keeper for his little boy,
who was threatened with a tuberculous hip; together with a pile of old
magazines, and some tobacco, indeed, whatever she could find lying about,
not really wanted, but only littering the room, to give those poor
fellows, who must be bored to death sitting all day with nothing to do but
polish the lamp and trim the wick and rake about on their scrap of garden,
something to amuse them. ^For how would you like to be shut up for a whole
month at a time, and possibly more in stormy weather, upon a rock the size
of a tennis lawn?^ she would ask; ^and to have no letters or newspapers, and
to see nobody; if you were married, not to see your wife, not to know how
your children were,--if they were ill, if they had fallen down and broken
their legs or arms; to see the same dreary waves breaking week after week,
and then a dreadful storm coming, and the windows covered with spray, and
birds dashed against the lamp, and the whole place rocking, and not be
able to put your nose out of doors for fear of being swept into the sea?
How would you like that?^ she asked, addressing herself particularly to her
daughters. ^So^ she added, rather differently, ^one must take them whatever
comforts one can.^

"It's due west," said the atheist Tansley, holding his bony fingers spread
so that the wind blew through them, for he was sharing Mr. Ramsay's
evening walk up and down, up and down the terrace. That is to say, the
wind blew from the worst possible direction for landing at the Lighthouse.
^Yes, he did say disagreeable things,^ Mrs. Ramsay admitted; it was odious
of him to rub this in, and make James still more disappointed; but at the
same time, she would not let them laugh at him. "The atheist," they
called him; "the little atheist." Rose mocked him; Prue mocked him;
Andrew, Jasper, Roger mocked him; even old Badger without a tooth in his
head had bit him, for being (as Nancy put it) the hundred and tenth young
man to chase them all the way up to the Hebrides when it was ever so much
nicer to be alone.

"Nonsense," said Mrs. Ramsay, with great severity. Apart from the habit
of exaggeration which they had from her, and from the implication (which
was true) that she asked too many people to stay, and had to lodge some in
the town, she could not bear incivility to her guests, to young men in
particular, who were poor as churchmice, "exceptionally able," her husband
said, his great admirers, and come there for a holiday. Indeed, she had
the whole of the other sex under her protection; for reasons she could not
explain, for their chivalry and valour, for the fact that they negotiated
treaties, ruled India, controlled finance; finally for an attitude towards
herself which no woman could fail to feel or to find agreeable, something
trustful, childlike, reverential; which an old woman could take from a
young man without loss of dignity, and woe betide the girl--pray Heaven it
was none of her daughters!--who did not feel the worth of it, and all
that it implied, to the marrow of her bones!

She turned with severity upon Nancy. ^He had not chased them,^ she said.
He had been asked.


^They must find a way out of it all. There might be some simpler way, some
less laborious way,^ she sighed. When she looked in the glass and saw her
hair grey, her cheek sunk, at fifty, she thought, possibly she might have
managed things better--her husband; money; his books. But for her own
part she would never for a single second regret her decision, evade
difficulties, or slur over duties. She was now formidable to behold, and
it was only in silence, looking up from their plates, after she had spoken
so severely about Charles Tansley, that her daughters, Prue, Nancy,
Rose--could sport with infidel ideas which they had brewed for themselves
of a life different from hers; in Paris, perhaps; a wilder life; not
always taking care of some man or other; for there was in all their minds
a mute questioning of deference and chivalry, of the Bank of England and
the Indian Empire, of ringed fingers and lace, though to them all there
was something in this of the essence of beauty, which called out the
manliness in their girlish hearts, and made them, as they sat at table
beneath their mother's eyes, honour her strange severity, her extreme
courtesy, like a queen's raising from the mud to wash a beggar's dirty
foot, when she admonished them so very severely about that wretched
atheist who had chased them--or, speaking accurately, been invited to
stay with them--in the Isle of Skye.

"There'll be no landing at the Lighthouse tomorrow," said Charles Tansley,
clapping his hands together as he stood at the window with her husband.
Surely, he had said enough. She wished they would both leave her and
James alone and go on talking. She looked at him. He was such a
miserable specimen, the children said, all humps and hollows. He couldn't
play cricket; he poked; he shuffled. He was a sarcastic brute, Andrew
said. They knew what he liked best--to be for ever walking up and down,
up and down, with Mr. Ramsay, and saying who had won this, who had won
that, who was a "first rate man" at Latin verses, who was "brilliant but I
think fundamentally unsound," who was undoubtedly the "ablest fellow in
Balliol," who had buried his light temporarily at Bristol or Bedford, but
was bound to be heard of later when his Prolegomena, of which Mr. Tansley
had the first pages in proof with him if Mr. Ramsay would like to see
them, to some branch of mathematics or philosophy saw the light of day.
That was what they talked about.


She could not help laughing herself sometimes. She said, the other day,
something about "waves mountains high." Yes, said Charles Tansley, it
was a little rough. "Aren't you drenched to the skin?" she had said.
"Damp, not wet through," said Mr. Tansley, pinching his sleeve, feeling
his socks.

^But it was not that they minded,^ the children said. It was not his face;
it was not his manners. It was him--his point of view. When they talked
about something interesting, people, music, history, anything, even said
^it was a fine evening so why not sit out of doors,^ then what they
complained of about Charles Tansley was that until he had turned the whole
thing round and made it somehow reflect himself and disparage them--he was
not satisfied. And he would go to picture galleries they said, and he
would ask one, did one like his tie? ^God knows,^ said Rose, ^one did not^.

Strife, divisions, difference of opinion, prejudices twisted into the very
fibre of being, ^oh, that they should begin so early,^ Mrs. Ramsay deplored.
They were so critical, her children. They talked such nonsense. She went
from the dining-room, holding James by the hand, since he would not go
with the others. It seemed to her such nonsense--inventing differences,
when people, heaven knows, were different enough without that. The real
differences, she thought, standing by the drawing-room window, are enough,
quite enough. She had in mind at the moment, rich and poor, high and low;
the great in birth receiving from her, half grudging, some respect, for
had she not in her veins the blood of that very noble, if slightly
mythical, Italian house, whose daughters, scattered about English
drawing-rooms in the nineteenth century, had lisped so charmingly, had
stormed so wildly, and all her wit and her bearing and her temper came
from them, and not from the sluggish English, or the cold Scotch; but more
profoundly, she ruminated the other problem, of rich and poor, and the
things she saw with her own eyes, weekly, daily, here or in London, when
she visited this widow, or that struggling wife in person with a bag on
her arm, and a note-book and pencil with which she wrote down in columns
carefully ruled for the purpose wages and spendings, employment and
unemployment, in the hope that thus she would cease to be a private woman
whose charity was half a sop to her own indignation, half a relief to her
own curiosity, and become what with her untrained mind she greatly
admired, an investigator, elucidating the social problem.

Insoluble questions they were, it seemed to her, standing there, holding
James by the hand. He had followed her into the drawing-room, that young
man they laughed at; he was standing by the table, fidgeting with
something, awkwardly, feeling himself out of things, as she knew without
looking round. They had all gone--the children; Minta Doyle and Paul
Rayley; Augustus Carmichael; her husband--they had all gone. So she
turned with a sigh and said, "Would it bore you to come with me,
Mr. Tansley?"

^For they were making the great expedition,^ she said, laughing. They were
going to the town. "Stamps, writing-paper, tobacco?" she suggested,
stopping by his side. But no, he wanted nothing. His hands clasped
themselves over his capacious paunch, his eyes blinked, as if he would
have liked to reply kindly to these blandishments (she was seductive but a
little nervous) but could not, sunk as he was in a grey-green somnolence
which embraced them all, without need of words, in a vast and benevolent
lethargy of well-wishing; all the house; all the world; all the people in
it, for he had slipped into his glass at lunch a few drops of something,
which accounted, the children thought, for the vivid streak of
canary-yellow in moustache and beard that were otherwise milk white. ^No,
nothing,^ he murmured.

^He should have been a great philosopher,^ said Mrs. Ramsay, as they went
down the road to the fishing village, ^but he had made an unfortunate
marriage.^ Holding her black parasol very erect, and moving with an
indescribable air of expectation, as if she were going to meet some one
round the corner, she told the story; an affair at Oxford with some girl;
an early marriage; poverty; going to India; translating a little poetry
"very beautifully, I believe," being willing to teach the boys Persian or
Hindustanee, but what really was the use of that?--and then lying, as they
saw him, on the lawn.

"Let us all go!" she cried, moving on, as if all those riders and horses
had filled her with childlike exultation and made her forget her pity.

"Let's go," he said, repeating her words, clicking them out, however, with
a self-consciousness that made her wince. "Let us all go to the circus."
No. He could not say it right. He could not feel it right. But why not?
she wondered.

He could not say it right. He could not feel it right. But why not?
she wondered. What was wrong with him then? She liked him warmly, at the
moment. ^Had they not been taken,^ she asked, ^to circuses when they were
children? Never,^ he answered, as if she asked the very thing he wanted;
had been longing all these days to say, how they did not go to circuses.
It was a large family, nine brothers and sisters, and his father was a
working man. "My father is a chemist, Mrs. Ramsay. He keeps a shop." He
himself had paid his own way since he was thirteen. Often he went without
a greatcoat in winter. He could never "return hospitality" (those were
his parched stiff words) at college. He had to make things last twice the
time other people did; he smoked the cheapest tobacco; shag; the same the
old men did in the quays. He worked hard--seven hours a day; his subject
was now the influence of something upon somebody--they were walking on and
Mrs. Ramsay did not quite catch the meaning, only the words, here and
there ... dissertation ... fellowship ... readership ... lectureship. She
could not follow the ugly academic jargon, that rattled itself off so
glibly, but said to herself that ^she saw now why going to the circus had
knocked him off his perch, poor little man, and why he came out,^
instantly, with all that about his father and mother and brothers and
sisters, and she would see to it that they didn't laugh at him any more;
she would tell Prue about it. What he would have liked, she supposed,
would have been to say how he had gone not to the circus but to Ibsen with
the Ramsays. He was an awful prig--oh yes, an insufferable bore. For,
though they had reached the town now and were in the main street, with
carts grinding past on the cobbles, still he went on talking, about
settlements, and teaching, and working men, and helping our own class,
and lectures, till she gathered that he had got back entire
self-confidence, had recovered from the circus, and was about (and now
again she liked him warmly) to tell her--but here, the houses falling
away on both sides, they came out on the quay, and the whole bay
spread before them and Mrs. Ramsay could not help exclaiming, "Oh,
how beautiful!" For the great plateful of blue water was before her;
the hoary Lighthouse, distant, austere, in the midst; and on the right,
as far as the eye could see, fading and falling, in soft low pleats,
the green sand dunes with the wild flowing grasses on them, which always
seemed to be running away into some moon country, uninhabited of men.

^That was the view,^ she said, stopping, growing greyer-eyed, ^that her
husband loved.^

She paused a moment. ^But now,^ she said, ^artists had come here.^ There
indeed, only a few paces off, stood one of them, in Panama hat and yellow
boots, seriously, softly, absorbedly, for all that he was watched by ten
little boys, with an air of profound contentment on his round red face
gazing, and then, when he had gazed, dipping; imbuing the tip of his
brush in some soft mound of green or pink. ^Since Mr. Paunceforte had been
there, three years before, all the pictures were like that,^ she said,
^green and grey, with lemon-coloured sailing-boats, and pink women on the
beach.^

^But her grandmother's friends,^ she said, glancing discreetly as they
passed, ^took the greatest pains; first they mixed their own colours, and
then they ground them, and then they put damp cloths to keep them moist.^



There he stood in the parlour of the poky little house where she had taken
him, waiting for her, while she went upstairs a moment to see a woman. He
heard her quick step above; heard her voice cheerful, then low; looked at
the mats, tea-caddies, glass shades; waited quite impatiently; looked
forward eagerly to the walk home; determined to carry her bag; then heard
her come out; shut a door; say ^they must keep the windows open and the
doors shut, ask at the house for anything they wanted^ (she must be talking
to a child) when, suddenly, in she came, stood for a moment silent (as if
she had been pretending up there, and for a moment let herself be now),
stood quite motionless for a moment against a picture of Queen Victoria
wearing the blue ribbon of the Garter; when all at once he realised that
it was this: it was this:--she was the most beautiful person he had ever
seen.


"Good-bye, Elsie," she said, and they walked up the street, she holding
her parasol erect and walking as if she expected to meet some one round
the corner, while for the first time in his life Charles Tansley felt an
extraordinary pride; a man digging in a drain stopped digging and looked
at her, let his arm fall down and looked at her; for the first time in his
life Charles Tansley felt an extraordinary pride; felt the wind and the
cyclamen and the violets for he was walking with a beautiful woman. He
had hold of her bag.


"No going to the Lighthouse, James," he said, as trying in deference to
Mrs. Ramsay to soften his voice into some semblance of geniality at least.



"Perhaps you will wake up and find the sun shining and the birds singing,"
she said compassionately, smoothing the little boy's hair, for her
husband, with his caustic saying that it would not be fine, had dashed his
spirits she could see. This going to the Lighthouse was a passion of his,
she saw, and then, as if her husband had not said enough, with his caustic
saying that it would not be fine tomorrow, this odious little man went and
rubbed it in all over again.


"Perhaps it will be fine tomorrow," she said, smoothing his hair.

All she could do now was to admire the refrigerator, and turn the pages of
the Stores list in the hope that she might come upon something like a
rake, or a mowing-machine, which, with its prongs and its handles, would
need the greatest skill and care in cutting out. All these young men
parodied her husband, she reflected; he said it would rain; they said ^it
would be a positive tornado.^


But here, as she turned the page, suddenly her search for the picture of a
rake or a mowing-machine was interrupted. The gruff murmur, irregularly
broken by the taking out of pipes and the putting in of pipes which had
kept on assuring her, though she could not hear what was said (as she sat
in the window which opened on the terrace), that the men were happily
talking; this sound, which had lasted now half an hour and had taken its
place soothingly in the scale of sounds pressing on top of her, such as
the tap of balls upon bats, the sharp, sudden bark now and then,
"How's that? How's that?" of the children playing cricket, had ceased;
so that the monotonous fall of the waves on the beach, which for the most
part beat a measured and soothing tattoo to her thoughts and seemed
consolingly to repeat over and over again as she sat with the children
the words of some old cradle song, murmured by nature, "I am guarding
you--I am your support," but at other times suddenly and unexpectedly,
especially when her mind raised itself slightly from the task actually in
hand, had no such kindly meaning, but like a ghostly roll of drums
remorselessly beat the measure of life, made one think of the destruction
of the island and its engulfment in the sea, and warned her whose day had
slipped past in one quick doing after another that it was all ephemeral as
a rainbow--this sound which had been obscured and concealed under the
other sounds suddenly thundered hollow in her ears and made her look up
with an impulse of terror.


Suddenly a loud cry, as of a sleep-walker, half roused, something about


^Stormed at with shot and shell^

sung out with the utmost intensity in her ear, made her turn
apprehensively to see if anyone had heard him. Only Lily Briscoe, she was
glad to find; and that did not matter. But the sight of the girl standing
on the edge of the lawn painting reminded her; she was supposed to be
keeping her head as much in the same position as possible for Lily's
picture. Lily's picture! Mrs. Ramsay smiled. With her little Chinese
eyes and her puckered-up face, she would never marry; one could not take
her painting very seriously; she was an independent little creature, and
Mrs. Ramsay liked her for it; so, remembering her promise, she bent her
head.


Indeed, he almost knocked her easel over, coming down upon her with his
hands waving shouting out, "Boldly we rode and well," but, mercifully, he
turned sharp, and rode off, to die gloriously she supposed upon the
heights of Balaclava. Never was anybody at once so ridiculous and so
alarming. But so long as he kept like that, waving, shouting, she was
safe; he would not stand still and look at her picture. And that was what
Lily Briscoe could not have endured. Even while she looked at the mass,
at the line, at the colour, at Mrs. Ramsay sitting in the window with
James, she kept a feeler on her surroundings lest some one should creep
up, and suddenly she should find her picture looked at. But now, with all
her senses quickened as they were, looking, straining, till the colour of
the wall and the jacmanna beyond burnt into her eyes, she was aware of
someone coming out of the house, coming towards her; but somehow divined,
from the footfall, William Bankes, so that though her brush quivered, she
did not, as she would have done had it been Mr. Tansley, Paul Rayley,
Minta Doyle, or practically anybody else, turn her canvas upon the grass,
but let it stand. William Bankes stood beside her.

e jacmanna was bright violet; the wall staring white. She would not
have considered it honest to tamper with the bright violet and the staring
white, since she saw them like that, fashionable though it was, since
Mr. Paunceforte's visit, to see everything pale, elegant, semitransparent.
Then beneath the colour there was the shape. She could see it all so
clearly, so commandingly, when she looked: it was when she took her brush
in hand that the whole thing changed. It was in that moment's flight
between the picture and her canvas that the demons set on her who often
brought her to the verge of tears and made this passage from conception to
work as dreadful as any down a dark passage for a child. Such she often
felt herself--struggling against terrific odds to maintain her courage; to
say: "But this is what I see; this is what I see," and so to clasp some
miserable remnant of her vision to her breast, which a thousand forces did
their best to pluck from her. And it was then too, in that chill and
windy way, as she began to paint, that there forced themselves upon her
other things, her own inadequacy, her insignificance, keeping house for
her father off the Brompton Road, and had much ado to control her impulse
to fling herself (thank Heaven she had always resisted so far) at
Mrs. Ramsay's knee and say to her--but what could one say to her? "I'm in
love with you?" No, that was not true. "I'm in love with this all,"
waving her hand at the hedge, at the house, at the children. It was
absurd, it was impossible. So now she laid her brushes neatly in the box,
side by side, and said to William Bankes:


"It suddenly gets cold. The sun seems to give less heat," she said,
looking about her, for it was bright enough, the grass still a soft deep
green, the house starred in its greenery with purple passion flowers, and
rooks dropping cool cries from the high blue. But something moved,
flashed, turned a silver wing in the air. It was September after all,
the middle of September, and past six in the evening. So off they
strolled down the garden in the usual direction, past the tennis lawn,
past the pampas grass, to that break in the thick hedge, guarded by red
hot pokers like brasiers of clear burning coal, between which the blue
waters of the bay looked bluer than ever.

Yes. That was it. He finished. He turned from the view. And, turning
to walk back the other way, up the drive, Mr. Bankes was alive to things
which would not have struck him had not those sandhills revealed to him
the body of his friendship lying with the red on its lips laid up in
peat--for instance, Cam, the little girl, Ramsay's youngest daughter. She
was picking Sweet Alice on the bank. She was wild and fierce. She would
not "give a flower to the gentleman" as the nursemaid told her.
No! no! no! she would not! She clenched her fist. She stamped. And
Mr. Bankes felt aged and saddened and somehow put into the wrong by her
about his friendship. He must have dried and shrunk.

The Ramsays were not rich, and it was a wonder how they managed to
contrive it all. Eight children! To feed eight children on philosophy!
^Here was another of them, Jasper this time, strolling past, to have a shot
at a bird,^ he said, nonchalantly, swinging Lily's hand like a pump-handle
as he passed, which caused Mr. Bankes to say, bitterly, how SHE was a
favourite. 

As for being sure which was which, or
in what order they came, that was beyond him. He called them privately
after the Kings and Queens of England; Cam the Wicked, James the Ruthless,
Andrew the Just, Prue the Fair--for Prue would have beauty, he thought,
how could she help it?--and Andrew brains. While he walked up the drive
and Lily Briscoe said yes and no and capped his comments (for she was in
love with them all, in love with this world) he weighed Ramsay's case,
commiserated him, envied him, as if he had seen him divest himself of all
those glories of isolation and austerity which crowned him in youth to
cumber himself definitely with fluttering wings and clucking
domesticities. They gave him something--William Bankes acknowledged that;
it would have been pleasant if Cam had stuck a flower in his coat or
clambered over his shoulder, as over her father's, to look at a picture
of Vesuvius in eruption; but they had also, his old friends could not but
feel, destroyed something. What would a stranger think now? What did
this Lily Briscoe think? Could one help noticing that habits grew on him?
eccentricities, weaknesses perhaps? It was astonishing that a man of his
intellect could stoop so low as he did--but that was too harsh a
phrase--could depend so much as he did upon people's praise.

"Oh, but," said Lily, "think of his work!"

It was Andrew's doing. She asked him ^what his
father's books were about^. "Subject and object and the nature of
reality," Andrew had said. And when she said Heavens, she had no notion
what that meant. "Think of a kitchen table then," he told her, "when
you're not there."

Mr. Bankes liked her for bidding him "think of his work." He had thought
of it, often and often. Times without number, he had said, "Ramsay is one
of those men who do their best work before they are forty." He had made a
definite contribution to philosophy in one little book when he was only
five and twenty; what came after was more or less amplification,
repetition. But the number of men who make a definite contribution to
anything whatsoever is very small, he said, pausing by the pear tree, well
brushed, scrupulously exact, exquisitely judicial. Suddenly, as if the
movement of his hand had released it, the load of her accumulated
impressions of him tilted up, and down poured in a ponderous avalanche all
she felt about him. That was one sensation. Then up rose in a fume the
essence of his being. That was another. She felt herself transfixed
by the intensity of her perception; it was his severity; his goodness. I
respect you (she addressed silently him in person) in every atom; you are
not vain; you are entirely impersonal; you are finer than Mr. Ramsay; you
are the finest human being that I know; you have neither wife nor child
(without any sexual feeling, she longed to cherish that loneliness), you
live for science (involuntarily, sections of potatoes rose before her
eyes); praise would be an insult to you; generous, pure-hearted, heroic
man! But simultaneously, she remembered how he had brought a valet all
the way up here; objected to dogs on chairs; would prose for hours (until
Mr. Ramsay slammed out of the room) about salt in vegetables and the
iniquity of English cooks.

"Jasper!" said Mr. Bankes. They turned the way the starlings flew, over
the terrace. Following the scatter of swift-flying birds in the sky they
stepped through the gap in the high hedge straight into Mr. Ramsay, who
boomed tragically at them, "Some one had blundered!"

"And even if it isn't fine tomorrow," said Mrs. Ramsay, raising her eyes
to glance at William Bankes and Lily Briscoe as they passed, "it will be
another day. And now," she said, thinking that Lily's charm was her
Chinese eyes, aslant in her white, puckered little face, but it would take
a clever man to see it, "and now stand up, and let me measure your leg,"
for they might go to the Lighthouse after all, and she must see if the
stocking did not need to be an inch or two longer in the leg.

"My dear, stand still," she said, for in his jealousy, not liking to serve
as measuring block for the Lighthouse keeper's little boy, James fidgeted
purposely; and if he did that, how could she see, was it too long, was it
too short? she asked.

And Croom on the Mind and Bates on the Savage
Customs of Polynesia ("My dear, stand still," she said)--neither of those
could one send to the Lighthouse. At a certain moment, she supposed, the
house would become so shabby that something must be done. If they could
be taught to wipe their feet and not bring the beach in with them--that
would be something. Crabs, she had to allow, if Andrew really wished to
dissect them, or if Jasper believed that one could make soup from seaweed,
one could not prevent it; or Rose's objects--shells, reeds, stones; for
they were gifted, her children, but all in quite different ways. And the
result of it was, she sighed, taking in the whole room from floor to
ceiling, as she held the stocking against James's leg, that things got
shabbier and got shabbier summer after summer. The mat was fading; the
wall-paper was flapping. You couldn't tell any more that those were roses
on it. Still, if every door in a house is left perpetually open, and no
lockmaker in the whole of Scotland can mend a bolt, things must spoil.
What was the use of flinging a green Cashemere shawl over the edge of
a picture frame? In two weeks it would be the colour of pea soup.
But it was the doors that annoyed her; every door was left open.
She listened. The drawing-room door was open; the hall door was open;
it sounded as if the bedroom doors were open; and certainly the window
on the landing was open, for that she had opened herself. That windows
should be open, and doors shut--simple as it was, could none of them
remember it? She would go into the maids' bedrooms at night and find
them sealed like ovens, except for Marie's, the Swiss girl, who
would rather go without a bath than without fresh air, but then
at home, she had said, "the mountains are so beautiful." She had said
that last night looking out of the window with tears in her eyes.
"The mountains are so beautiful." Her father was dying there,
Mrs. Ramsay knew. He was leaving them fatherless. Scolding and
demonstrating (how to make a bed, how to open a window, with hands that
shut and spread like a Frenchwoman's) all had folded itself quietly about
her, when the girl spoke, as, after a flight through the sunshine the
wings of a bird fold themselves quietly and the blue of its plumage
changes from bright steel to soft purple. She had stood there silent for
there was nothing to be said. He had cancer of the throat. At the
recolection--how she had stood there, how the girl had said, "At home the
mountains are so beautiful," and there was no hope, no hope whatever, she
had a spasm of irritation, and speaking sharply, said to James:

"Stand still. Don't be tiresome," so that he knew instantly that her
severity was real, and straightened his leg and she measured it.


"It's too short," she said, "ever so much too short."

^But was it nothing but looks,^ people said? ^What was there behind it--her
beauty and splendour? Had he blown his brains out,^ they asked, ^had he
died the week before they were married--some other, earlier lover, of whom
rumours reached one? Or was there nothing? nothing but an incomparable
beauty which she lived behind, and could do nothing to disturb?^ For
easily though she might have said at some moment of intimacy when stories
of great passion, of love foiled, of ambition thwarted came her way how
she too had known or felt or been through it herself, she never spoke.
She was silent always. She knew then--she knew without having learnt.
Her simplicity fathomed what clever people falsified. Her singleness of
mind made her drop plumb like a stone, alight exact as a bird, gave her,
naturally, this swoop and fall of the spirit upon truth which delighted,
eased, sustained--falsely perhaps.

("Nature has but little clay," said Mr. Bankes once, much moved by her
voice on the telephone, though she was only telling him a fact about a
train, "like that of which she moulded you." He saw her at the end of the
line, Greek, blue-eyed, straight-nosed. How incongruous it seemed to be
telephoning to a woman like that. The Graces assembling seemed to have
joined hands in meadows of asphodel to compose that face. Yes, he would
catch the 10:30 at Euston.

"But she's no more aware of her beauty than a child," said Mr. Bankes,
replacing the receiver and crossing the room to see what progress the
workmen were making with an hotel which they were building at the back of
his house. And he thought of Mrs. Ramsay as he looked at that stir among
the unfinished walls. For always, he thought, there was something
incongruous to be worked into the harmony of her face. She clapped a
deer-stalker's hat on her head; she ran across the lawn in galoshes to
snatch a child from mischief. So that if it was her beauty merely that
one thought of, one must remember the quivering thing, the living thing
(they were carrying bricks up a little plank as he watched them), and work
it into the picture; or if one thought of her simply as a woman, one must
endow her with some freak of idiosyncrasy--she did not like admiration--or
suppose some latent desire to doff her royalty of form as if her beauty
bored her and all that men say of beauty, and she wanted only to be like
other people, insignificant. He did not know. He did not know. He must
go to his work.)


Knitting her reddish-brown hairy stocking, with her head outlined absurdly
by the gilt frame, the green shawl which she had tossed over the edge of
the frame, and the authenticated masterpiece by Michael Angelo,
Mrs. Ramsay smoothed out what had been harsh in her manner a moment
before, raised his head, and kissed her little boy on the forehead.
"Let us find another picture to cut out," she said.

Starting from her musing she gave meaning to words which she had held
meaningless in her mind for a long stretch of time. "Some one had
blundered"--Fixing her short-sighted eyes upon her husband, who was now
bearing down upon her, she gazed steadily until his closeness revealed to
her (the jingle mated itself in her head) that something had happened,
some one had blundered. But she could not for the life of her think what.

Not for the world would she have spoken to him, realising, from the
familiar signs, his eyes averted, and some curious gathering together
of his person, as if he wrapped himself about and needed privacy into
which to regain his equilibrium, that he was outraged and anguished. She
stroked James's head; she transferred to him what she felt for her
husband, and, as she watched him chalk yellow the white dress shirt of a
gentleman in the Army and Navy Stores catalogue, thought what a delight it
would be to her should he turn out a great artist; and why should he not?
He had a splendid forehead. Then, looking up, as her husband passed her
once more, she was relieved to find that the ruin was veiled; domesticity
triumphed; custom crooned its soothing rhythm, so that when stopping
deliberately, as his turn came round again, at the window he bent
quizzically and whimsically to tickle James's bare calf with a sprig of
something, she twitted him for having dispatched "that poor young man,"
Charles Tansley. ^Tansley had had to go in and write his dissertation,^
he said.

"James will have to write HIS dissertation one of these days," he added
ironically, flicking his sprig.


^She was trying to get these tiresome stockings finished to send to
Sorley's little boy tomorrow,^ said Mrs. Ramsay.

^There wasn't the slightest possible chance that they could go to the
Lighthouse tomorrow,^ Mr. Ramsay snapped out irascibly.

^How did he know?^ she asked. ^The wind often changed.^


The extraordinary irrationality of her remark, the folly of women's minds
enraged him. He had ridden through the valley of death, been shattered
and shivered; and now, she flew in the face of facts, made his children
hope what was utterly out of the question, in effect, told lies. He
stamped his foot on the stone step. "Damn you," he said. But what had she
said? Simply that it might be fine tomorrow. So it might.

He stood by her in silence. Very humbly, at length, he said that ^he would
step over and ask the Coastguards if she liked.^

She was quite ready to take his word for it, she said. Only then they
need not cut sandwiches--that was all. They came to her, naturally, since
she was a woman, all day long with this and that; one wanting this,
another that; the children were growing up; she often felt she was nothing
but a sponge sopped full of human emotions. Then he said, ^Damn you.^ He
said, ^It must rain^. He said, ^It won't rain^; and instantly a Heaven of
security opened before her. There was nobody she reverenced more. She
was not good enough to tie his shoe strings, she felt.

"Some one had blundered," he said again, striding off, up and down the
terrace.

He stood stock-still, by the urn, with the geranium flowing over it. ^How
many men in a thousand million^, he asked himself, ^reach Z after all?^
Surely the leader of a forlorn hope may ask himself that, and answer,
without treachery to the expedition behind him, "One perhaps." One in a
generation. Is he to be blamed then if he is not that one? provided he
has toiled honestly, given to the best of his power, and till he has no
more left to give? And his fame lasts how long? It is permissible even
for a dying hero to think before he dies how men will speak of him
hereafter. His fame lasts perhaps two thousand years. ^And what are two
thousand years?^ (asked Mr. Ramsay ironically, staring at the hedge).
What, indeed, if you look from a mountain top down the long wastes of the
ages? The very stone one kicks with one's boot will outlast Shakespeare.
His own little light would shine, not very brightly, for a year or two,
and would then be merged in some bigger light, and that in a bigger still.
(He looked into the hedge, into the intricacy of the twigs.) Who then
could blame the leader of that forlorn party which after all has climbed
high enough to see the waste of the years and the perishing of the stars,
if before death stiffens his limbs beyond the power of movement he does a
little consciously raise his numbed fingers to his brow, and square his
shoulders, so that when the search party comes they will find him dead at
his post, the fine figure of a soldier? Mr. Ramsay squared his shoulders
and stood very upright by the urn.


Mrs. Ramsay, who had been sitting loosely, folding her son in her arm,
braced herself, and, half turning, seemed to raise herself with an effort,
and at once to pour erect into the air a rain of energy, a column of
spray, looking at the same time animated and alive as if all her energies
were being fused into force, burning and illuminating (quietly though she
sat, taking up her stocking again), and into this delicious fecundity,
this fountain and spray of life, the fatal sterility of the male plunged
itself, like a beak of brass, barren and bare. He wanted sympathy. He
was a failure, he said. Mrs. Ramsay flashed her needles. Mr. Ramsay
repeated, never taking his eyes from her face, that he was a failure.
She blew the words back at him. "Charles Tansley..." she said. But he
must have more than that. It was sympathy he wanted, to be assured of his
genius, first of all, and then to be taken within the circle of life,
warmed and soothed, to have his senses restored to him, his barrenness
made furtile, and all the rooms of the house made full of life--the
drawing-room; behind the drawing-room the kitchen; above the kitchen the
bedrooms; and beyond them the nurseries; they must be furnished, they must
be filled with life.



^Charles Tansley thought him the greatest metaphysician of the time, she
said.^ But he must have more than that. He must have sympathy. He must
be assured that he too lived in the heart of life; was needed; not only
here, but all over the world. Flashing her needles, confident, upright,
she created drawing-room and kitchen, set them all aglow; bade him take
his ease there, go in and out, enjoy himself. She laughed, she knitted.
Standing between her knees, very stiff, James felt all her strength
flaring up to be drunk and quenched by the beak of brass, the arid
scimitar of the male, which smote mercilessly, again and again,
demanding sympathy.

^He was a failure,^ he repeated. Well, look then, feel then. Flashing her
needles, glancing round about her, out of the window, into the room, at
James himself, she assured him, beyond a shadow of a doubt, by her laugh,
her poise, her competence (as a nurse carrying a light across a dark room
assures a fractious child), that it was real; the house was full; the
garden blowing. If he put implicit faith in her, nothing should hurt him;
however deep he buried himself or climed high, not for a second should he
find himself without her. So boasting of her capacity to surround and
protect, there was scarcely a shell of herself left for her to know
herself by; all was so lavished and spent; and James, as he stood stiff
between her knees, felt her rise in a rosy-flowered fruit tree laid with
leaves and dancing boughs into which the beak of brass, the arid scimitar
of his father, the egotistical man, plunged and smote, demanding sympathy.

Filled with her words, like a child who drops off satisfied, he said, at
last, looking at her with humble gratitude, restored, renewed, that ^he
would take a turn^; he would watch the children playing cricket. He went.

A shadow was on the page; she looked up. It was Augustus Carmichael
shuffling past, precisely now, at the very moment when it was painful to
be reminded of the inadequacy of human relationships, that the most
perfect was flawed, and could not bear the examination which, loving her
husband, with her instinct for truth, she turned upon it; when it was
painful to feel herself convicted of unworthiness, and impeded in her
proper function by these lies, these exaggerations,--it was at this
moment when she was fretted thus ignobly in the wake of her exaltation,
that Mr. Carmichael shuffled past, in his yellow slippers, and some demon
in her made it necessary for her to call out, as he passed,

"Going indoors Mr. Carmichael?"


He said nothing. He took opium. The children said ^he had stained his
beard yellow with it.^ Perhaps. What was obvious to her was that the poor
man was unhappy, came to them every year as an escape; and yet every year
she felt the same thing; he did not trust her. She said, "I am going to
the town. Shall I get you stamps, paper, tobacco?" and she felt him
wince. He did not trust her. It was his wife's doing. 

He was unkempt; he dropped things on his coat; he had the
tiresomeness of an old man with nothing in the world to do; and she turned
him out of the room. She said, in her odious way, "Now, Mrs. Ramsay and I
want to have a little talk together," and Mrs. Ramsay could see, as if
before her eyes, the innumerable miseries of his life. Had he money
enough to buy tobacco? Did he have to ask her for it? half a crown?
eighteenpence? Oh, she could not bear to think of the little indignities
she made him suffer.

For her own self-satisfaction was it that she
wished so instinctively to help, to give, that people might say of her,
"O Mrs. Ramsay! dear Mrs. Ramsay ... Mrs. Ramsay, of course!" and need her
and send for her and admire her? Was it not secretly this that she
wanted, and therefore when Mr. Carmichael shrank away from her, as he did
at this moment, making off to some corner where he did acrostics
endlessly, she did not feel merely snubbed back in her instinct, but made
aware of the pettiness of some part of her, and of human relations, how
flawed they are, how despicable, how self-seeking, at their best. Shabby
and worn out, and not presumably (her cheeks were hollow, her hair was
white) any longer a sight that filled the eyes with joy, she had better
devote her mind to the story of the Fisherman and his Wife and so pacify
that bundle of sensitiveness (none of her children was as sensitive as he
was), her son James.

"The man's heart grew heavy," she read aloud, "and he would not go. He
said to himself, 'It is not right,' and yet he went. And when he came to
the sea the water was quite purple and dark blue, and grey and thick, and
no longer so green and yellow, but it was still quiet. And he stood there
and said--"